CV102_01R_Ex01_pp.20-28
                INTRODUCTION
1.1. OVERVIEW OF CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE AND HEART FAILURE
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is an umbrella term used for all diseases of the heart and circulation, including coronary heart disease, stroke, heart failure, cardiomyopathy, and atrial fibrillation. In the UK, CVD has resulted in more than a quarter (28.5 per cent) of deaths, which is equivalent to 155,000 deaths each year and an average of 425 people  each  day,  or  one death every three minutes (Murray 2015). These figures above indicate how severe CVD is in the UK and with an ageing and growing population with improved survival rates from cardiovascular events we could indefinitely see these figures increase (Smolina et al., 2012). There is currently an estimated 7 million people living with CVD in the UK: 3.5 million men and 3.5 million women. Due to CVD affecting so many people in the UK the economic burden remains high, due to indirect costs from premature deaths and long term disabilities. The costs from CVD on the National Health Service (NHS) is estimated to be over ?15 billion each year in the UK (NICE 2011).

Not only in the UK is CVD an increasing problem but also worldwide. Globally CVD is the leading causes of death and disability (McMurray et al., 2012). CVD accounts for 17.3 million deaths per year worldwide and is expected to grow to more than 23.6 million by 2030 (Go et al., 2013). This statement is supported by the Study Global Burden of Disease which found that in 2013, 30% of all deaths worldwide were caused by CVD (Nichols et al., 2014). In 2012, evidence from Europe suggested that in some countries cancer has overtaken CVD as the leading cause of death. CVD went from being the main cause of death to the second cause of death in the UK. 28% of deaths were caused by CVD, and 29% were caused by cancer. When analysed by sex, CVD was still a larger cause of death than cancer for women (Bhatnagar et al., 2015), this is shown in Figure 1.1. [Figure 1.1 removed]

CVD currently affects 2.3 million people with chronic heart disease (CHD), 1.2 million people from stroke, 1 million from atrial fibrillation and over 480 000 from heart failure (Townsend et al., 2014). Overall ultimately the end stage of CVD is heart failure and despite extensive research and modern advances in treatments, chronic heart failure still remains one of the highest causes of morbidity and mortality therefore there is a definite need for further research in this area (Bhatnagar et al., 2015).
1.1.1. HEART FAILURE
Heart failure is a complex clinical syndrome of symptoms and signs that suggest the efficiency of the heart as a pump is impaired. These impairments can be due to structural or functional abnormalities of the heart. In general heart failure is the loss of the heart's ability to pump blood efficiently around the body, and is considered a multisystem disorder which affects not only the cardiovascular system but also the musculoskeletal, renal, neuroendocrine and the immune system (McMurray and Stewart, 2000). Some patients have heart failure due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction (LVSD) which is associated with a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction. Others have heart failure with a preserved ejection fraction (HFPEF).

Despite improved interventions, including treatment with angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, ?-blockers, spironolactone and even surgery, prognosis of heart failure still remains very poor (Hobbs et al., 2007). Recent research has changed focus to prophylactic treatment of heart failure to prevent chronic disease rather than treating already established heart failure. It is important to develop a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms and pathological events associated with heart failure and ventricular remodelling, which will result in new and effective treatment options for heart failure and CVD in the future. (Jana et al., 2013).
1.1.2. EPIDEMIOLOGY OF HEART FAILURE
As previously discussed Heart failure is recognised as a major and escalating public health problem, increasing in incidence due to an ageing population (Rahimi et al., 2015). It is predicted that over 2.5 million people will develop some form of heart related disease, rendering them with severe disabilities or causing mortality within the first year of diagnosis. In the United Kingdom (UK) 10% of people are affected by heart failure (Farmakis et al., 2015). 1-2% of the UK adult population is affected by heart failure increasing to 16.4% in adults over the age of 75 (British Heart Foundation Health Promotion Research Group, 2010). Heart failure is associated with a ~60% mortality rate within five years of diagnosis. Coronary heart disease is the leading cause of heart failure and affects 70% of heart failure patients.

Atrial fibrillation and renal dysfunction are also common precipitating factors of heart failure (Stewart et al., 2003). For many years heart failure has represented both a major health care and social economic burden; 5% of hospital admissions are solely due to heart failure (Riet et al., 2016). Cowie et al (2000) study also indicated that the one year survival rate for heart failure patients is worse than those patients diagnosed with breast, prostate and bladder cancer.

Overall there is half a million people in the UK living with heart failure, which highlighting the importance of cardio-vascular related research. In 2014 there were 73,000  deaths  directly  related to heart failure in the UK alone (Gerges et al., 2015). Unfortunately despite intense on- going research the mortality rate from heart failure still remains high.


1.1.3. PATHOLOGY OF HEART FAILURE
Heart failure is a progressive condition that arises when the myocardium has been exposed  to mechanical or pathological events that damage or overwork the heart's muscle for a sustained period of time (Clinton et al., 2012). Some of these strains include myocardial infarction, diabetes, ischaemic heart disease, systemic hypertension, valvular heart disease and lung disease leading to congestive cardiac failure (Cowie et al., 1997; Cowie et al., 1998).

The symptoms of heart failure include fatigue, poor exercise tolerance and shortness of breath with little exertion. The symptoms arise due to the heart's inability to pump oxygenated blood adequately around the body. As cardiac functioning becomes inadequate to oxygenate tissue, deliver nutrients, remove waste products, the activation of various (neuro) humoral regulatory mechanisms are activated and also intracellular adaptive responses occur in an attempt to maintain the normal cardiac contractility and functioning. (Kemp et al., 2012).CV10201 1049

The activation of the compensatory mechanisms results in an increase in cardiac output, an increase in ventricular volume and an increase in wall thickness through ventricular remodelling. Tissue perfusion is also maintained via an increase in arterial pressure through the activation of the neurohormonal systems.

The initial activation of the compensatory mechanisms are deemed beneficial in the early stages of heart failure. After pro-longed activation of the compensatory mechanisms the response in the heart ultimately results in a vicious cycle of reduced heart function (chronic heart failure) eventually leading to death (Bernardo et al., 2010).

Treatment strategies have been developed based upon  the  understanding  of  these  compensatory mechanisms. Medical therapy includes diuresis, suppression of the overactive neurohormonal systems, and augmentation of contractility (Clinton and John 2012). Surgical options include ventricular resynchronization therapy, surgical ventricular remodelling, ventricular assist device implantation and heart transplantation (Lloyd-Jones et al., 2002).  Despite significant understanding of the underlying pathophysiological  mechanisms  and  various treatments, heart failure still results in significant morbidity and carries a 50% 5-year mortality rate (World Health Organization. Cardiovascular disease).

Various studies have shown evidence that following heart failure or damage, the heart activates a variety of intracellular adaptive responses in attempt to maintain a normal cardiac contractility and function (Oka et al., 2014). These responses include the activation of the immune system which aims to resolve the threat and rescue the damaged myocardium. Another response is the development of hypertrophy which aims to increase cardiac contractility to maintain a normal physiological function to meet the demands of the body.
1.2. CARDIAC REMODELLING
Cardiac hypertrophy is the initial adaptive response to correct the deficit in  cardiac  output during heart failure or pressure overload, resulting in the enlargement of the heart, known as cardiac remodelling (Dorn et al., 2003). Cardiac remodelling involves molecular, cellular and interstitial changes that manifest clinically and cause an alteration in the size, shape and the general functioning of the heart (Abraham et al., 1997). 

Initially cardiac remodelling is beneficial in enhancing the cardiac functioning, pro-longed cardiac remodelling has been shown to contribute significantly to ventricular dysfunction (Braunwald and Bristow, 2000). This is because cardiac remodelling eventually induces pressure overload, the activation of the inflammatory response and an increase in volume load (Algra et al., 1991).

Heart failure results in different pathologies of the heart depending on the individuals (patient) response to the heart disease/injury. Most heart failure patients have demonstrated the same molecular, biochemical, and cellular events ultimately resulting in the change of the myocardium  structure. Cardiac remodelling can be categorised into two types; cardiac atrophy or cardiac hypertrophy. Heart failure patients experience cardiac hypertrophy, this type of hypertrophy will be inflicted on the animals used during this study to illustrate a hypertrophic animal model.
1.3  CARDIAC HYPERTROPHY

Cardiac hypertrophy is characterised by growth and thickening  of  the cardiac  muscles,  more so in the left ventricular wall. The aim of cardiac hypertrophy is to boost cardiac contractility  and workload ensuring adequate delivery of blood and oxygen to the periphery.

Cardiac hypertrophy or cardiac growth can be classified as either physiological or pathological hypertrophy. Cardiac hypertrophy may occur as a result of either physiological stress. For example excessive exercise, pregnancy, or as a result of pathological stress such as arterial hypertension or valvular heart disease. The difference in the signalling pathways involved in these two types of hypertrophy remains largely unknown. This study will be targeting pathological hypertrophy in the animal models to help understand the pathways involved during hypertrophy. The difference between physiological and pathological hypertrophy is shown in Figure 1.2 below.[Figure 1.2 removed]

1.3.1. PHYSIOLOGICAL HYPERTROPHY
Physiological cardiac hypertrophy is a beneficial adaptive response of the cardiovascular system, occurring during growth, pregnancy and in response to extensive exercise (Richey and Brown, 1998). Physiological hypertrophy enables the heart to meet the increased demands of the body by increasing left ventricular chamber dimensions with a proportional increase in wall thickness. Physiological cardiac hypertrophy is characterised by an increase in myocyte size without the development of fibrosis or apoptosis (Anversa et al., 1986) and is not associated with the development of cardiac disease and heart failure.

In the late 19th century, Henschen was the first to recognise exercise-induced cardiac enlargement. He found hypertrophy on both sides of the heart and concluded that there was an enlargement of the heart following exercise. Fagard (2003) also found that the left ventricular muscle mass in highly trained athletes is 60% greater than in non-athletic individuals. Maron and Pelliccia (2006) have found no evidence in the healthy population, excluding persons with underlying cardiovascular disease or genetic disorders, showing that remodelling due to exercise training leads to long term cardiac disease progression, cardiovascular disability, or sudden cardiac death. It is generally accepted that physiological cardiac hypertrophy in response to exercise is protective, in some instances it improves cardiac functioning and does not progress to heart failure.

The most distinguishing feature of physiological cardiac hypertrophy is its  ability to reverse  once the cardiac stress is removed. For example, the increase in left ventricular mass  in a  woman during pregnancy will return to pre-pregnancy levels 6-12 weeks after giving birth (Mabie et al., 1994).

1.3.2. PATHOLOGICAL HYPERTOPHY
Pathological cardiac hypertrophy develops in response to various causes such as valvular heart disease, myocardial infarction, cardiac arrhythmias, endocrine disorders and hypertension (Bernardo et al., 2010). Pathological cardiac hypertrophy begins as an adaptive response to increase cardiac load in order to normalise cardiac wall stresses and maintain cardiac functioning (Levy et al., 1990).

Pathological hypertrophy in an irreversible cardiac remodelling of the heart. The remodelling is characterised by an abnormal enlargement of the heart structure  and  shape  which eventually results in a decline in cardiac function. The enlargement of the heart is due to the disruption of cellular architecture and rearrangement of both cardiac and non-cardiac cells. In addition to the cardiac remodelling it also results in various other abnormalities. These abnormalities include a shift towards glycolytic metabolism,  disarrangement  of  the sarcomeres, alteration in the calcium handling, changes in contractility, systolic or diastolic dysfunction, and loss of myocytes with fibrotic replacement (Heineke and Molkentin, 2006). Bernardo et al., (2010) study supported the above statements demonstrating that pathological cardiac hypertrophy resulted in the loss of the cardiomyocytes ability to divide  and also that the cardiac heart muscle mass increased predominantly by the size of myocytes, rather than number of myocytes. The increase in the size of the myocytes reduced contractility in the heart causing a significant decline in cardiac functioning due to stiffening in the heart. CV10202 1081


	
