CV105_04R_Ex07
Cav1.3 channels in the SAN activate at thresholds around -50 mV peaking at -10 mV.132 Therefore, ICa,L in the SAN is triggered by the rising membrane potential late in phase 4 caused by NCX.100, 132 Blockade of ICa,L with nifedipine abolishes pacemaking from the central SAN but not the periphery.133 Isolated cells from Cav1.3 knock-out transgenic mice display bradycardia, irregular rhythms and prolonged AP duration.132, 134

1.4  Subsidiary atrial pacemaker tissue
Although the SAN is the primary leading source of automatic electrical activity in the heart, 'nodal-like' cells exist in the AVN and tissues outside of the CCS that retain the capability of automaticity.135 Subsidiary atrial pacemaker (SAP) tissues are often a source of ectopic beats which can lead to arrhythmias, or they can take over as leading pacemakers in cases of SND.136, 137 This provides backup pacing meaning that the heart rarely ever stops beating completely due to SND alone providing added layers of robustness to the vital function of pacemaking (figure 8).

Early work on SAP tissue in the 1970s used SAN-excised dogs.138 Initially these animals displayed junctional rhythms from around the AVN but after several days leading pacemakers shifted to bradycardic SAP tissue.138 In 80% of these animals the SAP was mapped to the inferior RA at the junction of the IVC. During isoprotenerol infusion leading pacemakers shifted to the interatrial region in 70% of animals.138 Studies have demonstrated SAP tissue in the inferior RA adjacent to the IVC and interatrial region in cats and dogs.139, 140 Nodal-like cells exist in the interatrial groove and AV ring bundle around the tricuspid valve in rats.22 A 'retroaortic' node in the interatrial septum has been described in guinea-pigs.141 In the human, tachyarrhythmia have been mapped to the CT, coronary sinus, atrial appendages, interatrial septum, left atrium, mitral valve annulus  and pulmonary sleeves.142-148
In the dog, SAP tissue adjacent to the IVC is bradycardic and has been seen to be more sensitive to cholinergic stimulation and more suppressible by overdrive pacing.149 APs recorded from SAP cells exhibited prominent DD, a less negative MDP, a slower upstroke velocity and a lower amplitude compared to surrounding atrial muscle.139 [Figure 8 removed]

In the cat, SAP beating rate is slowed by blockade of RyRs, SERCA and NCX as well as If, suggesting elements of both Ca2+ and membrane clocks contribute to pacemaking.101, 150, 151 The molecular character of this SAP tissue is intermediate between SAN and atrial tissue. Compared to the SAN, the SAP has a lower expression of HCN4 in the rat and concordantly If has a long activation time and smaller amplitude in the cat.152, 153 However, the rat SAP displays similar levels of Tbx3, Kir2.1, Nav1.5 and HCN1 to the SAN.152
1.5  Sinus node dysfunction in humans
SND in humans manifests clinically with bradycardia and episodic asystole. Symptoms can occur if the heart rate drops too low (e.g. <40 beats per minute (bpm)) or with long pauses (e.g. >3 seconds). Symptoms can include dizziness, syncope, collapse, confusion, chest pain, breathlessness or peripheral oedema due to reduced cardiac output. Those with early SND without significant haemodynamic compromise may be asymptomatic.
The only effective treatment for SND is implantation of an electronic pacemaker. According to the most recent UK audit in 2014, just under 40,000 new pacemakers were implanted, 20% of them for SND.6 The overall prevalence of SND in the UK is 0.03% affecting young and old, but it is much more common in the elderly.5

SND can be intrinsic within the SAN or caused by extrinsic factors or both. An Austrian study of 277 patients with compromising bradycardia showed that 51% of cases were caused by an extrinsic factor such as an adverse drug effect, electrolyte disturbance or heart attack. The rest were idiopathic and assumed to be due to intrinsic SND.154

The pathophysiology of 'idiopathic' SND remains unclear. Historically it is attributed to fibrosis and cell senescence.155, 156 Contemporary evidence suggests that remodelling of membrane ion channels and intracellular Ca2+ cycling are important factors in SND.157

Bradycardia and pauses may be due to reduced SAN automaticity or SAN exit block. Electrophysiology studies are not routinely performed in SND but are sometimes done in equivocal cases. Overdrive atrial pacing can be used to measure the corrected sinus node recovery time (cSNRT) and sinoatrial conduction time (SACT). These parameters will both be prolonged in 64% of SND cases, and 88% of all cases with prolonged cSNRT and SACT are specific to SND.158 cSNRT is the length of time between the last paced beat and the next spontaneous beat, minus the spontaneous cycle length.159 A short recovery time is important for the SAN to remain robust against ectopic electrical activity. A prolonged cSNRT may therefore suggest SND in the form of decreased intrinsic automaticity.

SND is also characterised by conduction delay along the CT, a more unicentric and caudal shift to leading pacemaker activity within the SAN, and areas of low voltage within the RA.160 Table 1 and figure 9 summarise the processes and remodelling that are likely to be taking place to account for these electrophysiological changes. The evidence is discussed below.

1.5.1 'Idiopathic' sinus node dysfunction
'Idiopathic' SND is more common in the elderly.161 For a long time fibrosis and atrophy of the SAN has been suggested as the cause. This was seen by studies in the 1970s in patients diagnosed with SND.155, 156 However, the same studies also reported cases of SND associated with normal histology as well as cases of severe fibrosis associated with normal SAN function.155, 156 Complicating matters further, SAN atrophy and fatty infiltration have been associated with ageing in general.162 Therefore it cannot automatically be assumed that fibrosis and atrophy are directly causing or the only cause of SND.

Ageing causes electrical remodelling in the atria and the SAN, changing expression of key ion channels. Nav1.5 is a Na+ channel required to improve electrical coupling of the SAN to the surrounding RA myocardium.163 Ageing rats demonstrated a reduction in Nav1.5 around the SAN periphery, which may cause SAN exit block by interfering with SAN to RA coupling.164 The gap junction Cx43 may also play a role in coupling cells at the SAN periphery, and ageing has been associated with reduced levels of Cx43 in the SAN periphery along with conduction slowing. 165  [Figure 9 removed] [Table 1 removed] CV10507 1044

