CV108_03R_Ex05
Although a single primary initiator of the Hippo pathway, in mammals, has yet to be elucidated there are a number of ways the pathway is triggered including cell polarity, cell adhesion molecules and surface receptors. A number of upstream components of the pathway have been recently discovered. G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) have now been reported to interact with the pathway and, depending on the signal that binds to the receptor, the Hippo pathway can be activated or inhibited (Yu et al., 2012). Yu et al. (2012) observed that lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) and a physiologically similar lipid, sphingosine 1- phosphophate (S1P), which are both found in serum, act through the GPCRs  12 and 13 to inhibit LATS1/2. This inhibition of LATS1/2 subsequently leads to YAP/TAZ activation. The group also found that glucagon and epinephrine acted through GPCRs to activate LATS1/2 and therefore inhibit YAP/TAZ activity (Figure 4). The protease-activated receptors (PAR), a group of GPCRs, have also been observed to increase YAP/TAZ activity when activated by thrombin (Mo et al., 2012). Importantly, Yu et al. (2012) conclude that due to the possibility that a number of different GPCRs can be activated by a single agonist, a knockdown or knockout of a particular GPCR may not significantly affect the pathway. Thus, isolating upstream molecules of the pathway to investigate further could be difficult. This also means that due to a number of different GPCRs responding to a single agonist, the response to a ligand can be diverse between different cell types (Yu et al., 2012). [Figure 4 removed]

In the skin, a-catenin is a negative regulator of YAP and actively binds YAP thus blocking de-phosphorylation and subsequent nuclear translocation of YAP (Schlegelmilch et al., 2011). Zhao et al. (2007) observed that at low cell density YAP was primarily localised in the nuclei of cells, however, at high cell density YAP was observed primarily in the cytoplasm. In the high cell density group of cells YAP was also predominately phosphorylated in the cytoplasm suggesting
YAP localisation and phosphorylation can be dictated by cell density (Zhao et al., 2007). Yap activity has also been reported to be regulated by the adhesion molecule E-cadherin (Kim et al., 2011) and tight junction protein angiomotin (Zhao et al., 2011). Therefore, high cell density leads to high cell-cell adhesion junction numbers and increased a-catenin and YAP binding. It is through this density-dependant mechanism that stem cells within the epidermis sense their environment and modulate their proliferation and tissue expansion (Schlegelmilch et al., 2011). In epithelial cells there are a number of molecules such as Merlin (Mer), Expanded (Ex) and Kibra, which are localised at the apical membrane, which are known to associate with MST1/2 and SAV (Yu et al., 2010). The exact mechanism of interaction between these molecules and the Hippo pathway remains to be determined. One possibility is that these molecules due to their location at the apical membrane receive signals regarding the cells surroundings and then regulate the Hippo pathway in response. Merlin is the product of the tumour suppressor gene neurofibromatosis-2 (NF2). Overexpression of the NF2 gene in mammalian cells leads to the inhibition of YAP as a result of LATS activation (Zhao et al., 2007). In contrast, knockouts of the NF2 gene display liver carcinomas and cataracts. These phenotypes can be blocked by deletion of YAP, suggesting an upstream role of the NF2 gene and its product Mer within the Hippo pathway. Interestingly, a number of common growth factors which normally regulate cell proliferation do not seem to interact with the Hippo pathway. For example, epidermal growth factor (EGF), fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and insulin, were found to not be involved in the activation of YAP (Yu et al., 2012). Recently a number of studies have found the Hippo pathway to be influenced by mechanical ques. Changes in YAP/TAZ activity have been observed depending on the geometry of the cell (Dupont et al., 2011). By investigating single cells, Dupont et al. (2011) reported that cells that are round and compact contain inactivated YAP whereas cells which have cytoskeletal tension and stress fibres due to cell spreading have activated YAP/TAZ (Wada et al., 2011). The stiffness of the extracellular matrix also influences the amount of active YAP, with an increase in stiffness increasing the amount of active YAP (Dupont et al., 2011).
1.4.1.1. Organ size control
Organ growth is an essential process during embryonic development. In adults, organ homeostasis is complex and is dependent on a balance between cell proliferation and cell death and thus must be tightly regulated. Unnecessary cell proliferation can lead to tumour growth. The Hippo pathway is one of a number of pathways which regulates organ size by inhibiting cell proliferation. The phenotypes of mutations of the Hippo pathway, upstream of YAP, can be characterised by an increase in cell proliferation.

In mice, a double knockout of MST1 and MST2 is embryonically lethal between E8-95. Double knockout embryos are also developmentally delayed resulting in reduced size (Song et al., 2010). Whereas, mice with a single knock out of MST1 or MST2 are morphologically normal suggesting that having either MST1 or MST2 is sufficient for normal embryonic development (Song et al., 2010). As a whole body knock out of MST1 and MST2 is embryonic lethal, a number of studies have used tissue specific knock outs to investigate the role of MST1/2 in organ size control. Song et al. (2010) found that MST1/2 control of organ size is tissue type specific in mice. The group observed increased liver, stomach, heart and spleen size after gene inactivation which was not observed in the lungs, kidney or intestines. These studies show that MST1 and MST2 are required not only in embryonic development but also adult tissue maintenance for the regulation of cell proliferation and cell apoptosis (Song et al. 2010). CV10805 961

