CV102_02R_Ex03
Overall prolonged pathological cardiac hypertrophy has been shown to lead to the development of heart failure and sudden cardiac death, making treatment  of  pathological  cardiac hypertrophy a promising target for reducing the incident of heart failure (Frey et al., 2004). Dorn et al (2004) and Lorell et al (2000) study demonstrated that following sustained pathological cardiac hypertrophy there was a decline in cardiac output, development of left ventricular dysfunction, interstitial fibrosis, dilated cardiomyopathy, cell death, ischemic heart disease, heart failure and sudden cardiac death.

When comparing physiological and pathological cardiac hypertrophy, both have distinctive features of cardiomyocyte growth without proliferation (Dorn et al., 2003). A comprehensive understanding of why pathological cardiac hypertrophy progresses  to  heart  failure  but  does not do so in physiological cardiac hypertrophy in response to exercise, is considered important  for identifying and targeting the critical signalling pathway responsible for the transition from hypertrophy to heart failure.

During this study the questions of interest are: at which stage does hypertrophy make the transition from physiological to pathological hypertrophy and become detrimental to the heart? Does the inflammatory response play a key role during the development of pathological hypertrophy following prolonged exposure to pressure overload? Does the activation of the inflammatory cytokines result in the difference seen between physiological and pathological cardiac hypertrophy?



1.4. TRANSVERSE AORTIC CONSTRICTION INDUCES PRESSURE OVERLOAD RESULTING IN CARDIAC HYPERTROPHY
Pressure overload refers to the pathological state of the cardiac muscle in which it  has  to contract while experiencing an excessive afterload. Pressure overload could potentially affect  any of the chambers of the heart, it most commonly affects the left ventricle due to hypertrophy. Aortic stenosis and hypertension are both common pathological stimuli that increase cardiac afterload. The pathological stimuli increase blood pressure and narrowing of the arteries  resulting in tension and stress on the wall of the left ventricle during ejection of the blood. This type of afterload results in the development of pressure overload induced hypertrophy  (Grossman et al., 1975). Prolonged pressure overload leads to concentric hypertrophy of the cardiac muscle, which can in turn lead to heart failure, myocardial ischaemia or, in extreme cases, outflow obstruction. Concentric hypertrophy is marked by an increase in systolic wall stress and an increase in parallel  sarcomeres.  The  left  ventricular  wall  thickness  also increases and cardiac mass increases with no change in the left ventricular chamber  volume  (Suh et al., 2002). Overall the consequences of pressure overload results in a decrease in ventricular compliance and diastolic dysfunction, followed by ventricular failure and systolic dysfunction (Pluim et al., 2000).

One aim of this study is to understand the underlying mechanism responsible for a pathological hypertrophic response, with the potential to develop therapeutic targets for heart failure. The most commonly used animal model to illustrate pressure overload induced cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure is mice subjected to Transverse Aortic Constriction surgery (TAC). TAC leads to a compensated hypertrophy of the heart which is associated with a temporary enhancement of cardiac contractility and over time, the response to the chronic haemodynamic overload becomes maladaptive, resulting in cardiac dilatation and heart failure. TAC achieves pathological hypertrophy by increasing the pressure load by aortic or renal artery banding. The TAC model has been extensively used as a valuable tool to mimic human cardiovascular diseases and elucidate fundamental signalling processes involved in the cardiac hypertrophic response and heart failure development (Stumpf et al., 2008). During this study, in order to mimic the human cardiac hypertrophic response, the animals will be subjected to TAC surgery to induce a pressure overload in the heart which will enable the study of the hypertrophic response.
1.5. PRESSURE OVERLOAD ACTIVATES THE INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE AS THE ADAPTIVE RESPONSE OF THE HEART
In response to pressure overload and stress, studies have shown that the heart triggers  a series of intracellular events such as the activation of the inflammatory response in both the cardiomyocytes and surrounding non-cardiomyocytes. Mosmann et al (1986) study highlighted that the activation of the inflammatory response was the primary protective mechanism following injury or pressure overload resulting in hypertrophy. Kasai et al (1997) and other supporting studies also found that the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines triggered by the inflammatory response played a key role during the development of the adaptive remodelling seen during hypertrophy. Other studies such as Frey (2003) and Masoudi et al (2003) supported the previous findings mentioned above that the activation of the inflammatory response is the primary adaptive response following pressure overload. The studies found that damaged cells produced a variety of stress molecules, which signalled the inflammatory response that there is an imbalance in homeostasis. This resulted in a variety of signalling cascades, accumulating in the release of leukocytes and pro-inflammatory cytokines; Tumour Necrosis Factor-a (TNF), Interleukin one (IL-1) and Interleukin six (IL-6) (Mann, 2002). The release of the leukocytes and pro-inflammatory molecules are responsible for triggering in the heart's adaptive response and aid in reperfusion, by promoting cardiac cells and fibre remodelling (Mann, 2002).

Remodelling occurred to an increase in vascular and tissue permeability, which allowed the migration of the leukocytes, pro-inflammatory cytokines and other immune molecules. Although the initial inflammatory response is beneficial, sustained inflammation and pro- inflammatory molecules expression has been directly linked to the development and progression of pathological cardiac hypertrophy (Mann, 2002). Eddy et al (1992) and Neta et al (1991) have demonstrated that during the initial stages of heart failure and pressure overload, inflammation and pro-inflammatory molecules play a key role in the development of cardiac hypertrophy.
1.6. THE ACTIVATION OF THE INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE DURING PATHOLOGICAL CARDIAC HYPERTROPHY
The inflammatory response plays a vital role during the development of hypertrophy and the pathogenesis of heart failure. Levine et al (1990) demonstrated a strong correlation between end stage heart failure and the activation of the inflammatory response. The understanding of the process regulating the inflammatory response during pathological hypertrophy may help to provide new insights in understanding the development and progression of heart failure.

The activation of the inflammatory response is usually triggered by an acute or chronic myocardial injury through genetic or environmental influences. On activation of the inflammatory response both pro-inflammatory cytokines and anti-inflammatory cytokines are released. These respond to the various stresses of external or internal environments with an instant protective role such as cardiac hypertrophy. However, an excessive activation of the pro-inflammatory cytokines leads to detrimental consequences. Studies have shown that heart failure patients displayed elevated plasma levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1 and IL-6 which correlated to the severity of the diseases (Dinarello et al., 2001). These pro- inflammatory cytokines are often used as markers to determine the severity of the heart disease. Understanding the inflammatory response and controlling the activation of the pro- inflammatory cytokines may prove vital in slowing down the progression of hypertrophy and end stage heart failure. CV10203 1131

As previously discussed the heart is a dynamic organ that can grow and change to accommodate alterations in its workload. During the development and in response to physiological stimuli or pathological injury, the heart undergoes hypertrophic enlargement, which is characterized by an increase in the size of the cardiac myocytes. This study will use a genetically modified animal model which will identify the important intermediate signal- transduction pathways implicate in the coordination of heart growth following physiological and pathological stimulation. This study will focus on the effects of the inflammatory response on hypertrophy, although there are other causes and signalling events that drive hypertrophy such as; Calcium signalling, pressure overload and adrenergic stimulation (Brooksby et al., 1992).
1.7. CYTOKINES
Cytokines are a group of biologically active proteins that play a key role as a regulator of the inflammatory response and are secreted by different cell types.  Recently cytokines  have become a novel focus of scientific interest. Cytokines have shown in various  studies  to  regulate target cell proliferation, differentiation, migration and also control the secretion of cytokines by other cells. The analysis and study of the cytokines and their expression has enabled a greater understanding of the pathogenesis of various diseases. Pathophysiological research into cytokines has led to the  vast  development  of  cytokines  as  therapeutic  targets and are now being used in clinical practice. These therapies  range from  early exploratory trials to well established therapies (Asadullah et al., 2002).  For  this  reason  targeting  cytokines during heart failure may prove beneficial in reducing heart failure as a therapeutic treatment. During this study both pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10) and anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL- 6, IL-1 and TNF-a) will be studied.
1.7.1. PRO-INFLAMMATORY CYTOKINES
The most important cytokines identified to be implicated during heart failure and pressure overload are TNF-a, IL-1 and IL-6. All three of these cytokines act as pro-inflammatory agents. Although these cytokines are thought to be produced by the inflammatory response, various studies have shown that nearly all nucleated cell types within the myocardium and cardiac myocytes are capable of synthesising these cytokine molecules in response to cellular injury or disease (Kapadia et al., 1995). Pro-inflammatory cytokines are not expressed in a normal healthy heart (Yamashita et al., 2000).

Following viral infections, myocardial infarction, or ischaemia where the cells in the heart are damaged or necrotic, the inflammatory system is activated and the transcription of the inflammatory molecules begins by activating the pro-inflammatory cytokines (Hedayat et al., 2010). The molecules then migrate to the site of damage where they exert their effects on both cardiac and non-cardiac cells. Yamashita et al (2000) showed inflammatory cytokines are highly expressed in response to injury in the heart indicating that the inflammatory cytokines play a key role during pathological cardiac hypertrophy.
1.7.1.1. INTERLEUKIN-1 (IL-1)
Interleukin-1 (IL-1) is an apical pro-inflammatory mediator activated during acute and chronic inflammation, it is a powerful inducer of the innate immune response. IL-1 consists of two distinctive binding ligands IL-1a and IL-1?. IL-1 is produced by endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and macrophages and is induced by microbial products that stimulate toll-like receptors, via various  endogenous triggers such as cell death and uric acid (Van et al., 2015).  The prototypic multifunctional pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1 is involved in the regulation of the inflammatory response. It plays an important role in the fluctuating regulation of acute inflammation causing fever like symptoms (Dinarello et al., 2001). Circulating levels of IL-1 are associated with the presence of cardiovascular diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, and dyslipidaemia (Benjamin et al., 2013).

IL-1 is implicated in the progression of heart failure as a result of its negative inotropic effects and deleterious effects on left ventricular remodelling. Another important mechanism by which IL-1 enhances atherogenesis and increases left ventricular dysfunction is by the release of endothelin-1, a potent vasoconstrictor which reduces cardiac functioning (Mann, 2002).

Elevated levels of circulating IL-1 have been shown to increase the expression of adhesion molecules, activation of endothelial and smooth muscle cell proliferation, macrophage activation and increased vascular permeability (Kumar et al., 1996). The cascade results in atherosclerosis, plaque destabilisation and cardiac dysfunction. Studies by Morton et al (2005) and Marcin et al. (2009) found that IL-1 level exerts hypertrophy whilst reducing cardiac contractility. Other studies by Chamberlain et al (2006) and Isoda et al (2004) found that IL-1 ablation in mice resulted in decreased cardiac hypertrophy and the mice were seen to be less prone to neointima development. Another study found that the over expression of IL-1? causes myocyte hypertrophy and concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with preserved left ventricular systolic function (Honsho et al., 2009).

The body's response to the inflammatory response activated by heart disease is to upregulate IL-1. Patti et al (2002) has shown that patients with acute coronary heart disease have a significant increase in IL-1 compared to patients with stable or no coronary heart disease. Galea et al (1996) and other clinical studies have shown an increase in IL-1 concentration in patients with atherosclerotic coronary arteries. Guillen et al (1995) also found that IL-1 serum levels were elevated in patients with acute myocardial infarction within the first few hours after the onset of chest pain. Furthermore, IL-1 has shown to exert its pleiotropic effects on the infarcted myocardium. The evidence suggests that IL-1 exerts pro-apoptotic and hypertrophic effects on cardiomyocytes, while reducing cardiac contractility (Kumar et al., 1996). Collectively the studies demonstrate that IL-1 induces cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Based on this evidence it is logical to hypothesise that inhibiting IL-1 will be beneficial in slowing down the progression of heart failure.

Some studies have been carried out to investigate the effects of over-expression of IL-1 in the heart. Honsho et al (2009) have shown that treatment with the over expression of IL-1 resulted in concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with interestingly preserved left ventricular systolic functioning. Freund et al (2005) also found that over-expression of IL-1 promotes myocyte hypertrophy. These studies demonstrate that IL-1 plays an important role in hypertrophy of the heart and have a potential impact on heart failure transition to chronic heart failure. CV10204 1005













