CV107_01R_Ex02
1.1.1 Osteogenic differentiation of vascular cells
The presence of osteoblast-like cells in areas of vascular calcification suggests that cells in the vascular wall have the potential to differentiate into these cell types. VSMCs found in the medial layer (Figure 1.1 A) have been proposed to be the origin of osteoblast-like cells in vessel walls due to their phenotypic plasticity. The addition of high-phosphate to culture media can induce human VSMCs to differentiate into osteoblast-like cells in vitro (Proudfoot et al. 1998; Jono et al. 2000). The osteogenic differentiation of VSMCs is accompanied by the loss of VSMC markers, smooth muscle 22-alpha (SM22a) and alpha smooth muscle actin (aSMA), and the gain of osteogenic markers, such as core binding factor alpha-1 (Cbfa1; see section 1.3.2), and increased alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity (Jono et al. 2000; Steitz et al. 2001). ALP is an enzyme that hydrolyses the potent calcification inhibitor inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi; see section 1.4) and in turn generates phosphate for mineral formation (Hessle et al. 2002). Recent findings from a genome- wide gene expression study have demonstrated that when VSMCs are cultured in osteogenic medium they express osteoblast-related genes but they are distinguishable from true osteoblast (Alves et al. 2014); hence the use of the term osteoblast-like cells. Lineage tracing has provided direct evidence that VSMCs give rise to osteoblast-like cells in vivo. Speer et al. (2009) used this method in matrix Gla protein (MGP)-null mice, a model of medial calcification, to show that 97% of osteoblast-like cells arise from VSMCs in blood vessels. More recently, lineage tracing was used in low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and apolipoprotein E-null mice fed high-fat diets, models of intimal calcification, to show that VSMCs give rise to 80% of osteoblast-like cells (Naik et al. 2012). The other 20% of cells giving rise to osteoblast-like cells originated from bone marrow-derived cells (Naik et al. 2012); demonstrating that other cell types also contribute to the initiation of vascular calcification.

Whether VSMCs have to undergo osteogenic differentiation to initiate matrix mineralisation is unclear as it was demonstrated recently in mastectomy specimens that VSMCs from areas of vascular calcification do not lose their expression of VSMCs markers or display increased expression of osteoblast markers (O'Neill & Adams, 2014). Furthermore, when rat aortic rings were cultured ex vivo in the presence of elevated phosphate, medial calcification was detected but osteogenic differentiation of VSMCs was not, as no changes in the mRNA levels of VSMC or osteoblast markers were seen when compared to control rings (Mune et al. 2009). Thus, osteogenic differentiation of VSMCs may be a consequence of mineral deposition rather than a cause of it. Supporting this, nanocrystals of calcium phosphate have been shown in vitro to induce the osteogenic differentiation of VSMCs (Sage et al. 2011; Villa-Bellosta et al. 2011a). Even though it is clear that VSMCs play a key role in the initiation of vascular calcification it has been noted in response to osteogenic-inducing media that not all preparations of VSMCs will undergo matrix mineralisation (Canfield, unpublished observations; Shioi et al. 1995). This may be due to basal levels of ALP activity, as VSMCs with low ALP activity fail to mineralise whereas cells with high activity do (Shioi et al. 1995). However, what governs the basal activity of ALP activity in VSMCs is unknown.
A subpopulation of VSMCs termed calcifying vascular cells (CVCs) have also been proposed as the origin of osteoblast-like cells. CVCs comprise 20-40% of the total VSMC population and spontaneously form multicellular calcified nodules when maintained in long-term culture; the cells within the nodules also express osteoblast markers (Bostr?m et al. 1993; Watson et al. 1994). CVCs are distinguished as a sub-population of VSMCs by the expression of the 3G5 antigen and have been hypothesised to be mesenchymal progenitor cells as they have the ability to differentiate into multiple mesenchymal lineages (Tintut et al. 2003). Other evidence suggests that pericytes, advential myofibroblasts, endothelial cells and stromal vascular cells can also provide a source of osteoblast-like cells during vascular calcification (Doherty et al. 1998; Shao et al. 2005; Yao et al. 2013; Yang et al. 2013). As this study will use VSMCs, the potential roles of other cells types in vascular calcification will not be elaborated upon herein.
1.1.2 Expression of osteogenic transcription factors and bone matrix proteins
During embryonic development a number of key transcription factors control the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to mature osteoblasts and regulate the expression of bone matrix associated proteins (Figure 1.2). Studies have revealed that these transcription factors are also important for the initiation of vascular calcification. [Figure 1.2 removed]

Cbfa1, also known as runt-related transcription factor 2, is an essential transcription factor for the differentiation of MSCs into osteoblasts; Cbfa1-defecient mice die of respiratory failure shortly after birth and show a complete lack of bone formation and mature osteoblasts (Komori et al. 1997; Otto et al. 1997). Cbfa1 induces the expression of a number of bone matrix proteins, which comprise the extracellular matrix of bone; these proteins include osteocalcin, osteopontin, bone sialoprotein and type 1 collagen (Otto et al. 2003). The over expression of Cbfa1 in cultured mouse skin fibroblasts leads to the expression of osteocalcin and bone sialoprotein, demonstrating that Cbfa1 can drive the expression of bone matrix proteins in non-osteoblast cell lines (Ducy et al. 1997). Missense mutations in the Cbfa1 gene that abolish the DNA binding ability of the transcription factor lead to cleidocranial dysplasia in humans, a disorder that is characterised by absent clavicles and delayed skeletal development (Lee et al. 1997).

In healthy vascular tissue Cbfa1, osteocalcin, osteopontin and bone sialoprotein are barely detected, but at sites of human intimal and medial calcification their expressions are markedly enhanced (Tyson et al. 2003; Moe et al. 2002; Moe et al. 2003). The same proteins are also up- regulated in vitro when VSMCs are induced to mineralise (Steitz et al. 2001; Byon et al. 2008). The importance of Cbfa1 in vascular calcification was demonstrated in vivo by breeding apolipoprotein E-null mice with smooth muscle cell specific Cbfa1-deficient mice; the double knockout mice were resistant to high-fat diet-induced intimal calcification when compared to apolipoprotein E-null mice (Sun et al. 2012). Furthermore, inhibiting Cbfa1 expression using RNA interference prevented VSMCs from depositing a mineralised matrix in culture (Byon et al. 2008; Speer et al. 2010). Thus, in these studies Cbfa1 appears to be essential for the initiation of vascular calcification. CV10702 1058

