CV103_02R_Ex04
1.4.5 The "Calcium Clock"
The above described voltage dependent currents are unable by themselves to explain the complexity and the resilience of the sinus beat; blocking currents of apparent key importance fail to totally inhibit the pacemaker. Lakatta et al proposed the presence of an intracellular "Ca++ clock" whose operation coupled with, and complements the function of the "membrane clock" 50. During the late phase of diastolic depolarization, Ca++ enters the cytosol from the sarcoplasmic reticulum through the Ryanodine receptor (RyR2). This local calcium release (LCR) is spontaneous, not voltage dependent, occurring even in the absence of an intact surface membrane 51. In the sarcolemma, but in close vicinity to RyR2, there are sodium-calcium exchangers (NCX) which are activated by LCR. The NCX is an electrogenic pump which exchanges 1 Ca++ for 3 Na+, therefore depolarises the membrane potential and triggers the opening of the L-type Ca++ channels which in turn is responsible for the rapid onset of action potential and electro-mechanic coupling by large-scale calcium induced calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum52,53. However, the theory of this coupled-clock mechanism is still controversial and debated 26,36,54,54-56. It is speculated, that whereas the key elements of the membrane clock are unique to the conduction system, the intracellular Ca++ handling apparatus is not, instead it is ubiquitous throughout the heart. Therefore, provided the calcium clock is really responsible for initiating action potentials, its presence in non-pacing myocardium would be both arrhythmogenic and superfluous 56. New evidence by Himeno et al seems to support that the "calcium clock" is not essential in pacemaking; inhibiting Ca++ transients with BAPTA (a Ca++ a chelating buffer) did not stop electrical activity in the sinus node cell of the guinea pig, suggesting that the spontaneous activity of the pacemaker cells solely depends on the "membrane clock" 57. However, the experimental designs in his work had several shortcomings, the observation made was likely secondary to a patch seal leak current58.
1.4.6 Electrical coupling and the connexins
Apart from transmembrane currents and intracellular Ca++ handling, appropriate intercellular electrical coupling is a prerequisite of proper functioning of the cardiac conduction system. Without it, synchronisation of firing within the sinus node, capture of the atrium and propagation of the activation potential would not be possible. The intercellular electrical coupling is achieved via gap junctions (low resistance non-selective pores) comprising connexins (Cx). In the working atrial myocardium the most abundant isoform is Cx43; its high conductance permits an unrestricted route for rapid propagation of the activation wave front 59. In contrast, within the sinus node such an arrangement would be disadvantageous; in fact some degree of electric isolation is essential in order to protect the node from the hyperpolarising effect of the surrounding myocytes 60. Hence it is not surprising that Cx43 is absent from sinus node and that the predominant isoform Cx45 has both a lower conductance per gap junctions as well as reduced density 61,62. The one order of magnitude slower intranodal conduction velocity (compared to the atrium) is a direct consequence of this feature. In the rabbit, toward the periphery of the sinus node the electric coupling improves as Cx43 positive atrial myocytes interdigitate with nodal cells. This feature may be important in enabling the small sinus node to drive the atrium 63. Similar arrangement has been described recently in the human: Cx43 and Cx40 connexins were detected at an intermediate level near the sinus node in the so-called paranodal area 59. The putative role of this area will be discussed later.
1.5 Electrical mapping of the pacemaker complex
1.5.1 Electrode-based "traditional" mapping
So far, in this review the electrical phenomenon within a single sinus nodal cell has been described based on ionic currents and their effect on transmembrane potential and assumptions made how the sinus node as a whole behaves, extrapolating the results. However, for studying the properties of intercellular action potential propagation directly, activation mapping of the natural pacemakers, sinus node or subsidiary pacemakers alike requires the ability of recording in the intact tissue. Extracellular cardiac potential was utilized as early as the beginning of the 20th century by Lewis (see section 2.2) 5. The electrode based mapping had several shortcomings: unlike working myocardium the sinus node produces low amplitude, low frequency signals which can be easily missed due to erroneous filtering or obscured by the much larger electrogram produced by the adjacent atrium 64. It is important to ensure that appropriate filtering is in place; the low-frequency signal produced by the sinus node is easily rejected by a low cut-off frequency filter that is set too high. Human electrophysiology studies aimed at studying atrial and ventricular extracellular potentials usually set to filter out signals below 30Hz. However, when one wishes to display sinus node potentials it is necessary to use a cut-off below 0.5Hz 65. This technique is adequate for mapping prior to ablative procedures of the sinus node as higher resolution for localization is not necessary 21,66. The development of the microelectrode technique allowed more precise localisation of the leading pacemaker; the closely spaced electrodes helped excluding far-field atrial electrograms by common mode rejection 67. Sano and Yamagishi using the microelectrodes were the first to observe highly anisotropic conduction within the node, relatively fast activation in caudo-cranial direction and block toward the septum in the rabbit. They proposed the presence of "preferential conduction pathways" to explain their findings 68. Unfortunately, the use of microelectrodes in vivo on the whole heart is not feasible due to the vigorous movement of the beating heart. CV10304 913

