CV102_02R_Ex04
As previously discussed the heart is a dynamic organ that can grow and change to accommodate alterations in its workload. During the development and in response to physiological stimuli or pathological injury, the heart undergoes hypertrophic enlargement, which is characterized by an increase in the size of the cardiac myocytes. This study will use a genetically modified animal model which will identify the important intermediate signal- transduction pathways implicate in the coordination of heart growth following physiological and pathological stimulation. This study will focus on the effects of the inflammatory response on hypertrophy, although there are other causes and signalling events that drive hypertrophy such as; Calcium signalling, pressure overload and adrenergic stimulation (Brooksby et al., 1992).
1.4. CYTOKINES
Cytokines are a group of biologically active proteins that play a key role as a regulator of the inflammatory response and are secreted by different cell types.  Recently cytokines  have become a novel focus of scientific interest. Cytokines have shown in various  studies  to  regulate target cell proliferation, differentiation, migration and also control the secretion of cytokines by other cells. The analysis and study of the cytokines and their expression has enabled a greater understanding of the pathogenesis of various diseases. Pathophysiological research into cytokines has led to the  vast  development  of  cytokines  as  therapeutic  targets and are now being used in clinical practice. These therapies  range from  early exploratory trials to well established therapies (Asadullah et al., 2002).  For  this  reason  targeting  cytokines during heart failure may prove beneficial in reducing heart failure as a therapeutic treatment. During this study both pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10) and anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL- 6, IL-1 and TNF-a) will be studied.
1.4.1. PRO-INFLAMMATORY CYTOKINES
The most important cytokines identified to be implicated during heart failure and pressure overload are TNF-a, IL-1 and IL-6. All three of these cytokines act as pro-inflammatory agents. Although these cytokines are thought to be produced by the inflammatory response, various studies have shown that nearly all nucleated cell types within the myocardium and cardiac myocytes are capable of synthesising these cytokine molecules in response to cellular injury or disease (Kapadia et al., 1995). Pro-inflammatory cytokines are not expressed in a normal healthy heart (Yamashita et al., 2000).

Following viral infections, myocardial infarction, or ischaemia where the cells in the heart are damaged or necrotic, the inflammatory system is activated and the transcription of the inflammatory molecules begins by activating the pro-inflammatory cytokines (Hedayat et al., 2010). The molecules then migrate to the site of damage where they exert their effects on both cardiac and non-cardiac cells. Yamashita et al (2000) showed inflammatory cytokines are highly expressed in response to injury in the heart indicating that the inflammatory cytokines play a key role during pathological cardiac hypertrophy.
1.4.1.1. INTERLEUKIN-1 (IL-1)
Interleukin-1 (IL-1) is an apical pro-inflammatory mediator activated during acute and chronic inflammation, it is a powerful inducer of the innate immune response. IL-1 consists of two distinctive binding ligands IL-1a and IL-1?. IL-1 is produced by endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and macrophages and is induced by microbial products that stimulate toll-like receptors, via various  endogenous triggers such as cell death and uric acid (Van et al., 2015).  The prototypic multifunctional pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1 is involved in the regulation of the inflammatory response. It plays an important role in the fluctuating regulation of acute inflammation causing fever like symptoms (Dinarello et al., 2001). Circulating levels of IL-1 are associated with the presence of cardiovascular diseases such as diabetes, hypertension, and dyslipidaemia (Benjamin et al., 2013).

IL-1 is implicated in the progression of heart failure as a result of its negative inotropic effects and deleterious effects on left ventricular remodelling. Another important mechanism by which IL-1 enhances atherogenesis and increases left ventricular dysfunction is by the release of endothelin-1, a potent vasoconstrictor which reduces cardiac functioning (Mann, 2002).

Elevated levels of circulating IL-1 have been shown to increase the expression of adhesion molecules, activation of endothelial and smooth muscle cell proliferation, macrophage activation and increased vascular permeability (Kumar et al., 1996). The cascade results in atherosclerosis, plaque destabilisation and cardiac dysfunction. Studies by Morton et al (2005) and Marcin et al. (2009) found that IL-1 level exerts hypertrophy whilst reducing cardiac contractility. Other studies by Chamberlain et al (2006) and Isoda et al (2004) found that IL-1 ablation in mice resulted in decreased cardiac hypertrophy and the mice were seen to be less prone to neointima development. Another study found that the over expression of IL-1? causes myocyte hypertrophy and concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with preserved left ventricular systolic function (Honsho et al., 2009).

The body's response to the inflammatory response activated by heart disease is to upregulate IL-1. Patti et al (2002) has shown that patients with acute coronary heart disease have a significant increase in IL-1 compared to patients with stable or no coronary heart disease. Galea et al (1996) and other clinical studies have shown an increase in IL-1 concentration in patients with atherosclerotic coronary arteries. Guillen et al (1995) also found that IL-1 serum levels were elevated in patients with acute myocardial infarction within the first few hours after the onset of chest pain. Furthermore, IL-1 has shown to exert its pleiotropic effects on the infarcted myocardium. The evidence suggests that IL-1 exerts pro-apoptotic and hypertrophic effects on cardiomyocytes, while reducing cardiac contractility (Kumar et al., 1996). Collectively the studies demonstrate that IL-1 induces cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Based on this evidence it is logical to hypothesise that inhibiting IL-1 will be beneficial in slowing down the progression of heart failure.

Some studies have been carried out to investigate the effects of over-expression of IL-1 in the heart. Honsho et al (2009) have shown that treatment with the over expression of IL-1 resulted in concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with interestingly preserved left ventricular systolic functioning. Freund et al (2005) also found that over-expression of IL-1 promotes myocyte hypertrophy. These studies demonstrate that IL-1 plays an important role in hypertrophy of the heart and have a potential impact on heart failure transition to chronic heart failure. CV10204 1005

