CV107_05R_Ex09
Ceramide can also induce apoptosis by activating downstream proteins (Figure 1.10). The activation of PP2A by exogenous C2 ceramide leads to the activation of Bax, and the inactivation of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2, which leads to apoptosis (Xin & Deng, 2006; Ruvolo et al. 1999; Ruvolo et al. 2002; Deng et al. 2009). Additionally, the activation of PP1 by ceramide induces apoptosis by inhibiting the production of anti-apoptotic caspase-9b splice variant and promoting the expression of the pro-apoptotic caspase-9 splice variant (Chalfant et al. 2002). Lysosomally located cathepsin D is an additional target of ceramide that regulate apoptosis. The direct interaction of ceramide with the cathepsin D pro-protein in lysosomes results in an autocatalytic proteolysis the produces the mature and active cathepsin D protein (Heinrich et al. 1999). When glioma or HeLa cells are stimulated with TNFa or treated with the chemotherapeutic-agent, gemcitabine, increases in lysosomal ceramide occur and cathepsin D becomes activated and released in the cytosol, leading to the activation of the pro-apoptotic proteins Bid and Bax, which induce MOMP (Heinrich et al. 2004; Dumitru et al. 2009). The inhibition of the kinase activity of Akt by exogenous C2 ceramide has also been proposed as a mechanism by which ceramide induces apoptosis (Zhou et al. 1998); however, how apoptosis-inducing ceramide inactivates Akt is unknown. Of relevance tothis current PhD study, an accumulation of ceramide in cultured VSMCs induced by apolipoprotien C-I, nitric oxide or andrographolide leads to apoptosis (Kolmakova et al. 2004; Pilane & LaBelle, 2004; Chen et al. 2013); demonstrating that ceramide has the potential to induce apoptosis in VSMCs.

Ceramide also regulates the cell cycle (Figure 1.10). During growth arrest induced by serum withdrawal, the levels of ceramide become elevated in MOLT-4 cells and WI38 fibroblasts (Dbaibo et al. 1995; Lee et al. 2000). Elevated ceramide initiates growth arrest by activating PP1 and PP2A, which in-turn inhibit the activity of cyclin-dependent kinase 2, leading to the de- phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein (Dbaibo et al. 1995; Lee et al. 2000). De- phosphorylated retinoblastoma protein sequesters E2F, an essential growth factor required for the progression through the cell cycle (Lee et al. 2000). Ceramide also directly activates the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor p21 in vitro, an additional protein that can inhibit the activity of cyclin- dependent kinase 2 (Lee et al. 2000). Other evidence suggests that ceramide induces growth arrest by directly activating PKC?, which activates the stress-activated c-jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) and inhibits Akt signalling, leading to growth arrest (Bourbon et al. 2000; Bourbon et al. 2002; Fox et al. 2007). Whether ceramide induces apoptosis or growth arrest is thought to be mediated by the activation of other signalling proteins. For example, the inhibition of PKC prevents ceramide-induced apoptosis but not growth arrest; whereas in cells where the retinoblastoma protein is either missing or inactive, ceramide can induce apoptosis but not growth arrest (Hannun & Luberto, 2000). [Figure 1.10 removed]

As mentioned in the previous section ceramide is a family of molecules and each member differs in the length of its fatty acid chain. The CerSs govern which fatty acid chain is incorporated into ceramide in the de novo and salvage pathways (Mullen et al. 2012). This has led to the "many ceramides" hypothesis, which states that each individual ceramide species is generated within a distinct biochemical pathway and elicits a unique cellular function (Hannun & Obeid, 2011). The best example of this hypothesis comes from analysing the sphingolipid composition of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas as it was found that C18 ceramide is selectively down-regulated, leading to enhanced cell growth, which can be reversed by over expressing CerS1, which only increases C18 ceramide levels (Koybasi et al. 2004). In further support of the above hypothesis, a recent study also using squamous cell carcinomas demonstrated that C18 ceramide inhibits cell growth, whereas in contrast, C16 ceramide promotes cell growth (Senkal et al. 2010). However, in a separate study using breast and colon cancer cells it was demonstrated that the long-chain ceramides (C16, C18 & C20) are anti-proliferative, whereas the very long-chain ceramides (C24 & C24:1) promote cell proliferation (Hartmann et al. 2012). Therefore, it appears that in certain cell types individual ceramide species have unique functions, but further research is required to understand how chain length governs downstream signalling effects.

When the above information regarding the role of ceramide in cellular functions is considered together with what is known about vascular calcification a number of potential links can be drawn. Firstly, stimuli that are known to increase ceramide levels, such as TNFa and oxidative stress, are also known to promote vascular calcification (see section 1.5), suggesting that ceramide levels may increase during VSMC matrix mineralisation. Secondly, ceramide has been implicated in cellular differentiation processes and given the proposed importance of osteogenic differentiation to VSMC matrix mineralisation (see section 1.3.1), a further link between ceramide and vascular calcification can be drawn. Thirdly, ceramide is a potent inducer of apoptosis and as this process is a major driver of VSMC matrix mineralisation, ceramide may regulate this cellular event during vascular calcification. Finally, cell signalling molecules that are implicated in VSMC matrix mineralisation, such as Akt, PKC, p38 MAPK and ERM proteins (see section 1.6), are also regulated by ceramide levels. Thus, it is logical to propose that ceramide can regulate vascular calcification.
1.10.1 Sphingosine
Sphingosine was the first sphingolipid molecule shown to have bioactive effects when it was demonstrated to inhibit the activity of PKC in vitro (Hannun et al. 1986). Since then it has been demonstrated that the addition of exogenous sphingosine to a wide-range of cultured cells leads to the induction of apoptosis (Quintans et al. 1994; Ohta et al. 1994; Krown et al. 1996). TNFa- stimulated apoptosis also leads to an increase in sphingosine levels, which suggest that sphingosine may mediate the pro-apoptotic functions of this cytokine (Quintans et al. 1994; Krown et al. 1996). Sphingosine has been suggested to induce apoptosis through the inhibition of key signalling proteins including PKC (Ohta et al. 1994), ERK (Jarvis et al. 1997) and Akt (Chang et al. 2001). Sphingosine can also directly activate the caspase-cleaved form of PKCd (Hamaguchi et al. 2003) and PKA (Ma et al. 2005), with the latter occurring in a cAMP-independent-manner. A mechanism of how sphingosine induces apoptosis was only discovered recently and it involves the 14-3-3 protein, which under normal circumstances forms a dimer with itself and binds and inactivates the pro-apoptotic molecule, Bad (Datta et al. 2000). When sphingosine activates either PKCd or PKA both these kinases can phosphorylate 14-3-3 at Ser58, leading to the formation of monomers and the release of Bad (Woodcock et al. 2010), thus leading to the initiation of MOMP. Of the bioactive sphingolipids, sphingosine has received the least attention as a signalling molecule. This is possibly due to its cytotoxic effects as an accumulation of sphingosine can lead to membrane permeabilization (Ullio et al. 2012), thus making it difficult to study when present in excess amounts. CV10709 1158

