CV104_03R_Ex05
For patients in whom preservation of fertility is desirable, or with significant previous cyclophosphamide exposure, the other first-line option (in keeping with FDA approval and NICE guidance) is Rituximab. Rituximab was first developed as an adjunct to chemotherapy for treatment of B cell lymphomas. In AAV, it has been found that higher numbers of activated B cells can correlate with disease activity76, therefore logically leading to the potential use of Rituximab as a therapy for AAV. Initially Rituximab was used in patients with refractory, relapsing disease77 but the publication of two Randomised Controlled Trials have demonstrated non- inferiority to cyclophosphamide for induction of disease remission. The American "RAVE" trial78 compared administration of Rituximab (375mg/m2, weekly for four weeks) with daily oral cyclophosphamide converted to oral azathioprine at remission (3- 6 months). The steroid regime was the same in both groups (tapered and discontinued by 5 months in those remaining without disease flare). 130/ 197 patients (66%) had renal involvement. 63/99 patients (64%) who had received Rituximab met the primary end point of no disease activity plus no steroids at 6 months, compared with 52/98 (53%) in the cyclophosphamide group. This allowed the authors to conclude that Rituximab was non- inferior to cyclophosphamide for induction of remission, including for those patients with severe disease. In terms of adverse events, leucopenia was more common in the group treated with cyclophosphamide (10% versus 3%) but infection rates were identical between the two groups (occurring in 7% of the patients). The European RITUXIVAS study79 differed in that all the patients included had renal involvement. The treatment protocols also varied in that this trial used pulsed intravenous cyclophosphamide for the control arm, and the patients in the Rituximab group also received two doses of cyclophosphamide (15mg/kg) with the first and third doses of Rituximab. The steroid dose was tapered but patients remained on 5mg prednisolone/ day from 6 months. This was an unblinded study and the follow- up period was longer than the RAVE trial at 12 months. Sustained remission was achieved in 25/33 (76%) of the patients receiving Rituximab and 9/11 (82%) of the control group. 36% of patients receiving Rituximab had at least 1 infectious episode compared with 27% of the cyclophosphamide group. The authors therefore concluded that in their trial, Rituximab was not superior in inducing remission or at avoiding treatment related toxicity in this population, compared with cyclophosphamide. 

This may be explained by the fact that some of the adverse events such as infectious episodes may be related to the steroid regimes which were identical between intervention and control arms. Indeed, it can be noted that the RAVE trial, which aimed to have patients off steroids completely by 6 months, had a much lower reported infection rate than RITUXIVAS.

It has been suggested that patients treated with Rituximab do not appear to be at increased risk of serious infection despite their complete B cell depletion due to reasonably well preserved IgG levels (but a fall in IgM levels)80. However, repeated courses are likely to affect the ability of the humoral immunity to fight new pathogens. A cohort study of 29 patients with GPA evaluated immunoglobulin levels in patients receiving pre-emptive "maintenance" Rituximab therapy (1g biannually or 2g annually, median dose 9g received)81. Of these patients, eight discontinued therapies due to hypogammaglobulinaemia, defined as total IgG levels < 6g/L. Five of these had severe or recurrent infections. This paper described risk factors for severe hypogammaglobulinaemia requiring treatment withdrawal as being male, having renal involvement and receiving the 1g biannual regime. The Cambridge group have subsequently described the use of replacement intravenous immunoglobulins (IvIg) in patients with recurrent infections and hypogammaglobulinaemia following Rituximab therapy82. Of these, six continued to receive Rituximab alongside the IvIg replacement, for disease control.

These issues become more relevant as the evidence gathers to support the use of Rituximab in maintenance of remission. For patients having received cyclophosphamide, once remission is achieved the patient can be switched to maintenance immunosuppression, first-line with azathioprine, or with mycophenolate mofetil, methotrexate or leflunomide as other possibilities83. However, it is less clear-cut how to continue or alter treatment for those patients initiated on Rituximab. Equally, for patients who relapse on maintenance oral therapy, and require Rituximab to induce remission, there is little evidence to guide whether to continue their oral agent. Recommendations for the use of Rituximab in AAV, published in 2011, did not issue firm guidance with regards to this area, stating the available evidence to be that whilst many published series had continued other agents alongside Rituximab, the RCTs had not84. However, these patients would require pre-emptive Rituximab to ensure maintenance of remission. Whilst this is supported by the current NHS England funding policy for relapsing/ refractory patients requiring Rituximab, maintenance therapy with Rituximab is not commissioned for patients receiving it first-line85.

However, this position may alter in future as evidence builds. The MAINRITSAN study was a non-blinded randomized controlled trial comparing Rituximab (5 x 500mg doses over 18 months) with azathioprine (2 mg per kilogram per day for 12 months, and then 1.5 mg per kilogram per day for 6 months and 1 mg per kilogram per day for 4 months), following achievement of remission with standard cyclophosphamide and steroid therapy. Both arms received tapering prednisolone doses as part of their maintenance therapy86. This study reported superiority of Rituximab over azathioprine for prevention of major relapses over 28 months' follow-up with 29% of patients in the azathioprine group relapsing compared with 5% in the rituximab group (HR for relapse 6.61). A follow-up study, MAINRITSAN 2 (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01731561) is currently underway aiming to assess whether Rituximab for maintenance therapy is best administered at regular time points or based upon returning B cells and ANCA titres. This will further contribute to how this treatment is best used in control of AAV.

The ongoing UK study RITAZAREM (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01697267) will provide additional data, comparing 4 monthly 1g Rituximab infusions, over 20 months with Azathioprine (withdrawn by month 27) following induction of remission with Rituximab for relapsing disease. The primary outcome is time to relapse with a follow-up period of 4 years.

Other agents have been considered for treatment of AAV. Following on from the success of B cell depleting therapies for this disease, as mentioned above the BREVAS study (Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01663623) is a phase 3 clinical trial comparing Belimumab, with placebo, alongside azathioprine for maintenance of remission. Belimumab has recently received NICE approval for treatment of active lupus with some evidence for clinical effectiveness from 2 clinical trials87. Abatacept inhibits T cell activation by blocking engagement of CD-28 with its ligand. Based on this mechanism of action and the known roles of T cells in GPA, an open label trial of Abatacept was undertaken in 20 patients with relapsing non-severe GPA88. Patients were continued in addition on their maintenance immunosuppression agent. Eighty percent of patients achieved remission, with a median time to remission of 1.9 months. An acceptable adverse event profile in addition suggests that this may be a drug warranting further investigation for this population.

The mainstay of new clinical trials in AAV involves minimization of steroid exposure due to the significant side effect profile from these agents. However, until new treatments are available it remains prudent to maintain vigilance for possible complications of immunosuppression due to the associated possible morbidity and mortality. CV10405 1216


