CV104_01R_Ex01
1.1 BACKGROUND
ANCA (anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody) associated vasculitis (AAV) is an umbrella term for a group of rare, multi- system autoimmune diseases causing potentially life- threatening inflammation of small blood vessels. Although it appears that outcomes from this disease are generally improving, morbidity and mortality is still high. This thesis aims to identify some of the contributors to this morbidity and to describe possible barriers to improving outcomes for this population including how these barriers may be overcome.To better identify the possible contributory factors to this morbidity and mortality, this introduction will give an overview of the disease, from diagnosis to treatment and longer term outcomes.
1.1.1 What is ANCA Associated Vasculitis? An overview of disease pathogenesis
AAV is an autoimmune disorder that causes small to medium sized blood vessel inflammation leading to organ damage and possibly failure. Histologically, vascular damage and destruction may be visualised but classically the lesions are pauci-immune. However, it is now firmly established that the pathogenesis of this disease is linked with formation of anti- neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA). ANCA was first described in association with glomerulonephritis in an Australian case series in 19891. These antibodies were observed in a cohort of patients with what we now recognise to be ANCA Associated Vasculitis and the aetiology of the antibodies was postulated to be linked with exposure of the patients to Ross river virus (a group A arbovirus) due to the geographical clustering.
Following this initial discovery their pathogenic potential for causing vascular injury was first described by Falk et al in 19902. This work originated from the observation that ANCA were present in the serum of around 80% of patients with pauci-immune systemic vasculitis or glomerulonephritis. The group went on to demonstrate, in an in vitro setting, that ANCA could activate neutrophils resulting in release of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and postulated that this was the mechanism by which tissue damage was effected in AAV. Since then there has been a growing body of evidence supporting the pathogenic nature of ANCA including animal models and a case report of trans placental transfer of these antibodies causing neonatal disease3-5.

On immunofluorescence, these antibodies are classified as c-ANCA (cytoplasmic) or p- ANCA (peri- nuclear) depending on their pattern of staining. Through ELISA we can now test specifically for ANCA directed against the antigenic components expressed on the neutrophil membrane, proteinase 3 (PR3) and myeloperoxidase (MPO). These antigen specific antibodies tend to segregate with clinical phenotype. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) is predominantly linked with c-ANCA antibodies formed against PR3 (70%) and Microscopic Polyangiitis with p-ANCA against MPO (50%)6.

1.1.2 PR3 versus MPO: the role of antigens and antibodies
It has relatively recently been demonstrated that MPO and PR3 associated disease are genetically different (discussed later)7. This was likely unsurprising to the majority of clinicians who, for many years, have observed that patients with different antibodies appear to have different diseases, both phenotypically and prognostically. Both MPO and PR3 are neutrophil membrane proteins that are expressed predominantly in the earlier stages of neutrophil development, promyelocyte and myeloblast stages8, in the healthy population. It has been demonstrated that level of expression of PR3 on neutrophil membranes appears to be under genetic regulation, and that patients with GPA have a higher percentage of membrane PR3 expressing neutrophils, compared with healthy controls9.

Current opinion on the pathogenesis of this disease is that an inflammatory stimulus, such as infection, primes these neutrophils, leading to membrane expression of MPO or PR310. IgG ANCA are produced by B cells against these neutrophil membrane antigens, under the stimulus of inflammatory cytokines and T cell dysregulation. Binding of the antibody to antigen on the neutrophil surface causes neutrophil activation, in the setting of priming by certain inflammatory cytokines, which may result in adherence to and migration through the vessel wall, activation of reactive oxygen species, neutrophil degranulation and enzyme release. It is through these mechanisms, further perpetuated by complement activation, that tissue damage occurs11,12(see Figure 1).

The role of MPO in disease development has been the most extensively studied with Xiao's successful animal model of MPO associated pauci-immune glomerulonephritis and pulmonary capilleritis13 contributing significantly to understanding of pathogenesis. Indeed, it was the MPO murine model that uncovered the role of the alternative complement
pathway in induction of disease14, in turn leading to clinical trials of a C5a receptor inhibitor in ANCA associated glomerulonephritis (discussed below). Essentially, activation of neutrophils can cause relocation of MPO from azurophilic granules within the neutrophil to the surface of the cell membrane, whereby anti- MPO antibodies can bind causing neutrophil degranulation. However, in addition, MPO is released extracellularly within Neutrophil Extracellular Traps (NETS), the role of which are discussed subsequently.
One of the most recent descriptions of the potential role of MPO in disease development includes a schema in which not just MPO targeted antibodies are pathogenic but also with possible roles for MPO reactive T cells and even direct MPO toxicity15. Low level anti- MPO ANCA has been demonstrated in the healthy population, but further work has elucidated that this appears to be a different epitope than the one present in active disease16.

PR3 associated disease has proven to be a much more difficult entity to replicate with the most successful model resulting from creation of a human-mouse chimeric immune system prior to passive transfer of human IgG from patients with PR3. This produced vasculitic lung and renal injury in a substantial proportion of the mice adding further weight to the evidence for the pathogenic nature of ANCA17. [Figure 1 removed] CV10401 1040

