CV104_01R_Ex02
1.1.1 Neutrophils and NETs in AAV
Adding to the models for disease development, there has been recent suggestion that Neutrophil Extracellular Traps (NETs) may have a role to play in pathogenesis. NETs are a chromatin mesh containing cytoplasmic components including MPO and PR318. There are two models of NET production. In the first, termed NETosis, NETs are formed through release of cytoplasmic contents, this being a form of cell death. The second involves DNA and enzyme extrusion but does not appear to result in cell death19. NETs have been identified in the kidneys (through analysis of renal biopsy samples) of patients with AAV. In addition, abnormally shaped NETs can be shown in animal models to induce MPO ANCA formation and pulmonary capilleritis20.

1.1.2 The role of B cells, T cells and complement
Plasma cells are obviously implicated in the pathogenesis of disease through production of, predominantly IgG, ANCA. However, the role of B cells in this disease appears to extend beyond this, supported by the efficacy of the anti CD20 monoclonal antibody Rituximab in the treatment of AAV. Studies have explored the potential role of B regulatory (Bregs) cells (which may have a role in T cell regulation) in AAV, finding that regulatory B cells (classed as IL10+ B cells) were significantly diminished in patients with AAV compared with healthy controls21. Another group has demonstrated that in active disease Bregs (in this study identified as CD5+ cells) were lower in those AAV patients with active disease22. However, subsequent studies have failed to demonstrate the use of CD5+ Bregs as biomarkers for disease activity with further phenotyping of these cells required23.

B lymphocyte stimulator (Blys), a neutrophil produced B-cell survival signal24 is another area of research interest, with Belimumab, an anti-Blys monoclonal antibody having been shown to be effective in the treatment of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus25. It has been demonstrated that AAV patients with active disease have higher levels of Blys, and that  Blys release from primed neutrophils may be stimulated by the presence of PR3 ANCA24.
The currently underway phase III clinical trial BREVAS (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01663623) aims to evaluate the efficacy/safety of Belimumab in combination with azathioprine for maintenance of remission in AAV (versus azathioprine alone).

T cells have been known for some time to play a significant role in the pathogenesis of GPA with the presence of over-active peripheral T cells, as well as the presence of T cells in,granulomatous lesions in GPA being previously reported12. However, the discovery of Th17, which secretes the pro-inflammatory IL-17 has reawakened interest in this area.
Increased presence of Th-17 cells has been demonstrated in patients with GPA26, with higher levels of IL-17 present during acute vasculitic episodes27. IL-23 is an upstream cytokine vital for Th17 lineage induction. In the previous study, IL-23 levels were found to correspond with disease activity27. It has been shown that infections such as Staphylococcus aureus may influence development of the Th17 lineage through IL-23 production28.

The production of these Th17 cells may also be dependent on regulatory T cells (Tregs). A number of groups have demonstrated that Tregs from patients with AAV are unable to suppress T -cell proliferation12,29. It may be that increased Th17 cell development in part follows this diminished suppressive action of Tregs or indeed that Th17 cells are possibly even able to develop directly from Tregs30. AAV is predominantly a disease of the elderly with the peak age of incidence being 65-74 years31. It is well established that the risk of autoimmunity increases with age with theories such as involution of the thymus with compensatory T cell proliferation and changes in T cell apoptosis suggested in explanation of this phenomenon. However, from cohort studies of those with "limited" GPA it can be noted that this is a disease in which the age of onset appears to be earlier. Limited GPA has been found to be associated with a predominantly Th1 helper response and systemic disease with a Th2 response32. With increasing age, the cytokine response to stimulus shifts from Th1 to Th2, perhaps explaining why the elderly are more prone to development of systemic versus local disease.

There has been recent focus on the role of the alternative complement pathway in the pathogenesis of vasculitis, with data supporting that this occurs through neutrophil activation generating C5. C5 then appear to not only cause chemotaxis of neutrophils but also further primes neutrophils 33. Inhibition of C5 using monoclonal antibodies provided a protective effect against the development of glomerulonephritis in a murine model of MPO IgG induced glomerulonephritis34. Following this a C5a receptor antagonist has been developed as a potential therapeutic agent and is undergoing Phase 2 trials with early results suggesting a potential therapeutic role in ANCA vasculitis glomerular disease35.

1.2 EPIDEMIOLOGY OF AAV
ANCA associated vasculitis is a rare disease with a combined incidence of between 13 and 20 per million in Europe36. Of these GPA is the predominant disorder in Northern Europe with an annual incidence in one study of 11.3/million compared with 5.9/million for MPA37. This trend is reversed in Southern Europe and Southern Asia with MPA representing the majority of disease in these areas38. This pattern of distribution supports two theories concerning the development of AAV. The first, that this is a disease with genetic contribution to susceptibility and secondly, that environmental factors are likely to play a role in disease development. Both theories now have substantial evidence in their support.

1.2.1 Genetics of AAV
The first work looking at genetic predisposition to development of AAV was published in 1992 when a highly significant association between HLA DR1 and disease was reported in those with GPA compared with healthy controls39. Subsequently in 2003, Schreiber et al. published research revealing that the general population appeared to be divided into 2 subgroups- those with high levels of PR3 expressed on neutrophil membranes and those with low levels9, and that the level of expression appeared to remain stable over time (12 months). They then investigated a group of patients with GPA and discovered that these patients had a significantly higher number of neutrophils expressing membrane PR3.
Comparison of PR3 membrane expression in monozygotic twins, compared with dizygotic, demonstrated significant correlation between expression levels in the monozygotic twins. This supported the argument that the degree of PR3 expression on neutrophil membranes appeared to be under genetic control. This link was further strengthened by the observation that first-degree relatives of those with GPA had a relative risk of developing the disease of 1.5640.

Following this, increasing availability of gene array testing has allowed identification of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) which appear to confer risk to the individual of developing AAV. There have been two Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) in AAV published in recent years. The first European identified a strong association in a SNP at HLA- DPB1 with the presence of disease. This study also demonstrated significant differences at several loci including SERPINA1, MHC and PRTN3, associated with PR3 positive but not MPO positive disease7. The US GWAS41, including only patients with GPA
also identified the same HLA association, but in addition identified a SNP near SEMA6A associated with the presence of GPA. CV10402 1185

