CV104_02R_Ex04

1.2 DIAGNOSIS AND CLASSIFICATION
Once disease has developed in a genetically predisposed individual, the greatest challenge perhaps for the patient, is receiving timely and accurate diagnosis and classification of their disorder, allowing for appropriate treatment. It is clinically relevant to ensure the correct immunological and clinical subtype are identified as this has significant prognostic implications. AAV may be categorised as Microscopic Polyangiitis (MPA), Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (GPA) or Eosinophilic Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (EGPA). However, due to increasing evidence that EGPA comprises a uniquely different spectrum of disorders it is only the two most common of these, MPA and GPA, shall be considered here.
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (formally known as Wegener's Granulomatosis) causes small vessel inflammation in association with granuloma formation. It is associated with initial upper airway disease in over 70% of patients and may remain limited to these organs. However, in the multi- system form it can affect the lungs, causing granulomatous disease or pulmonary haemorrhage, renal failure or nerve and skin involvement, amongst other rarer manifestations58.[Table 1 removed]

Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis was first described by Klinger in 193159 as a form of polyarteritis nodosa and then defined as a distinct clinical entity by Wegener in 1936 and 193960. For 80 years, this inflammatory condition, characterised by granulomatous inflammation with a predilection for the renal and respiratory tract (commonly including the ear and nose) was known as Wegener's Granulomatosis. This condition has recently
been renamed as Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (GPA) by the Board of Directors for the American College of Rheumatology (ACR), the American Society of Nephrology and the European League against Rheumatism (EULAR) partly in keeping with the movement away from eponymous syndromes and following concerns regarding potential affiliations Dr.Wegener may have had with the Nazi Party in the Second World War61.

Microscopic Polyangiitis was first recognised as a condition causing rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, in association with systemic illness, chest and abdominal signs. The glomerulonephritis was identified by the presence of fibrinoid necrosis and crescents in the kidney at autopsy in a case series published in 194862 and the term "microscopic
periarteritis" was coined. Prior to this there had been debate as to whether patients suffering from this form of vasculitis actually had periarteritis nodosa (polyarteritis nodosa) with an "independent" glomerulonephritis. MPA is differentiated from GPA pathologically by the absence of granulomas and phenotypically by the (usual) absence of upper respiratory tract involvement. Current disease classification criteria are outlined in Table 2. [Table 2 removed]

As a complex and heterogenous group of disorders, with a myriad of presentations, diagnosis and classification of AAV can be challenging. Although there is suggestion that time to recognition and diagnosis of these disorders may be improving64 there is still recent documentation of significant delay to diagnosis65,66. A recent publication of the combined outcomes of EUVAS clinical trials showed that 34.5% of patients had at least 1 item of damage at baseline (as measured by the Vasculitis Damage Index), likely reflecting damage accruing from disease manifestations prior to diagnosis67.

Classification of disease has been historically challenging with the first American College of Rheumatology classification system omitting MPA68. Due to a need for accurate classification for inclusion of patients in clinical trials and epidemiological studies, the EMEA classification algorithm was developed and published in 2007 which was validated to successfully classify patients into a single category69. Since then disease classification has moved on, with the publication of the GWAS study and the suggestion of MPO positive and PR3 positive disease as distinct entities7 and with the publication of the updated 2012 classification criteria63. The ongoing Diagnostic and Classification in Vasculitis (DCVAS) international study aims to assist in this area by assisting with development and validation of diagnostic and classification criteria for all, not just small vessel, vasculitis70.
1.3 TREATMENT
Following accurate diagnosis and classification of disease, timely and appropriate treatment can be delivered. Treatment strategies for AAV can be divided into "induction" and "maintenance" phases. Induction therapy conventionally involves high dose steroid therapy e.g. prednisolone at 1mg/kg of body weight and may include one to three initial intravenous steroid infusions, depending on disease severity (See Table 3). Steroid dose is then tapered down after the first month, with recommendations that the steroid dose is not reduced to less than 15mg for the first 3 months then tapered to 10mg or less during remission57. Remission can be defined as the absence of disease activity attributable to vasculitis as measured by a standardised, validated scoring system such as the Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Score (BVAS)71.Disease category. [Table 3 removed]

Patients with severe organ or life threatening disease may also be treated with plasma exchange, supported by evidence from the MEPEX trial73 which showed that the use of 7 plasma exchange sessions for patients presenting with AAV and serum creatinine > 500?mol/l had a reduction in risk of 24% of progression to end stage renal failure at 12 months, when compared with those treated with 3 pulses of intravenous methylprednisolone (1g).

Alongside steroid treatment, patients with organ or life-threatening disease should be treated with cyclophosphamide which can be administered as daily oral or pulsed intravenous (i.v.) therapy, until remission is reached (usually at 3 to 6 months). The publication of initial outcomes from the CYCLOPS clinical trial comparing pulsed intravenous cyclophosphamide therapy to daily oral, supported pulsed therapy, allowing a much lower total cyclophosphamide dose to be administered. The CYCLOPS study indicated that the two regimens were equivalent for time to remission but with fewer leucopenic episode in the pulsed intravenous group, indicating perhaps a safety advantage74. However, longer term follow-up data (median follow-up 4.3 years) has suggested that those receiving a lower cumulative dose of cyclophosphamide are more likely to relapse (20.8% daily oral versus 39.5% i.v.) although the increased relapse rate was not associated with an increase in morbidity or mortality75. CV10404 943


