CV106_02R_Ex03
1.4 AAA screening and the indication for elective AAA repair
Due to the high mortality associated with AAA rupture and the potential to identify those at risk of AAA rupture, the management of patients with AAA is focused on identification through screening and elective repair when appropriate. Ultrasound is a non-invasive reliable method of detecting AAA and is utilised by most screening programmes.(47) One of the earliest screening studies suggested that screening could potentially reduce the incidence of ruptured AAA by 49%.(48) There have subsequently been four large randomised controlled trials assessing whether screening for AAA would be beneficial.(11-14) A review of these trials found screening to result in a significant reduction in AAA-related mortality in men (OR 0.60; 95%CI 0.47 to 0.78) and a decreased incidence of ruptured aneurysm(OR 0.45; 95% CI 0.21 to 0.99).(49) AAA screening has been shown not to have an impact on patients health and well-being.(50) As a result of these studies a national screening programme has since been established in the UK.

Once a patient has been found to have an AAA the primary aim is to prevent premature death due to AAA rupture. The majority of patients with AAA experience no symptoms meaning that preventing rupture and improving survival is the main indication for elective AAA repair. The decision when to perform AAA repair is therefore a balance between the risks of surgery and the risk of death due to rupture. The recommendation of surgical repair of large AAAs (= 6.0cm) has been accepted for some time due to the high risk of rupture in these patients. When to repair smaller AAAs was for some time a controversial issue however an established indication was identified by two randomised controlled trials.

The UK small aneurysm trial (UKSAT) trial included 1090 men with aneurysms between 4.0 and 5.5 cm in diameter. Patients were randomly allocated to either six monthly ultrasound surveillance or elective open aneurysm repair.(37) Although mortality was initially higher in the immediate repair group there was no significant difference in mortality at two, four, six and twelve years following randomisation.(51) The Aneurysm Detection and Management (ADAM) trial was similar to the UKSAT in methodology and included 1136 patients with aneurysms between 4.0 and 5.5cm with a mean follow up of 4.9 years.(38) As was the case with the UKSAT, there was no difference in outcomes between the immediate repair group and the surveillance group. A pooled analysis of the two trials confirmed no benefit from early surgery in small AAAs.(52) As a result the established indication is to offer surgical repair of asymptomatic AAAs when the AAA diameter reaches 5.5cm in men. The indication for elective repair in women is generally accepted to be at the smaller AAA diameter of 5.0cm.
1.5 Elective AAA repair
The successful treatment of aneurysms was a therapeutic challenge for many years. Early strategies included ligating the proximal and distal ends and removing the aneurysm thrombus, attempting to induce thrombosis in the aneurysm using foreign materials such as wire and wrapping aneurysms with cellophane.(3, 4) A major development in the treatment of AAA came when Crafoord successfully performed an end to end anastomosis of the thoracic aorta following resection of a coarctation.(53) Gross subsequently performed the first aortic homograft in man following resection of a longer coarctation.(54) Treating AAAs with homograft's first took place in 1951 initially unsuccessfully by Schafer and Hardin, (3) and later that year successfully by Dubost.(55)

AAA repair is now one of the most commonly performed cardiovascular surgery procedures with just under 5000 procedures performed each year in the UK,(56) and evidence that the incidence of AAA repair is increasing.(57) Due to the risks of morbidity and mortality being significantly lower for elective AAA repair than for emergency repair of ruptured AAA, where possible and appropriate elective AAA repair should be performed to reduce the risk of AAA related mortality. There are currently two main ways in which elective AAA repair is performed open AAA repair and endovascular AAA repair (EVAR).

Open AAA repair involves a laparotomy, cross clamping of the aorta for at least 30 minutes and replacement of the diseased aorta with a synthetic graft. Laparoscopic AAA repair is similar in principal to open AAA repair but performed using laparoscopy rather than a laparotomy but has not been widely adopted.(58) Although there is inevitable variation,(39) the mortality rate following open elective AAA repair is generally accepted as being approximately 5% with some evidence that the 30- day mortality rate is falling.(59, 60) In addition to the mortality risk associated with open AAA repair there is a significant risk of major morbidity including respiratory failure, renal failure and cardiac events. In addition to medical complications, laparotomy related complications can occur either early or late following open AAA repair.(61)

Open AAA repair was the only treatment option for AAAs for forty years until endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) was developed as a less invasive alternative by Parodi.(62) EVAR is performed by feeding guide-wires, usually via catheters placed in the femoral arteries across the aneurysm. A stent graft is then positioned above and below the aneurysmal segment of the aorta. The sheath in which the stent graft is delivered is then removed and the stent graft expanded to make contact with the aortic wall. This allows blood to flow through the graft rather than through the aneurysmal segment. The advantage of EVAR over open AAA repair is that it removes the need for a laparotomy and cross clamping of the aorta. It is therefore less invasive and associated with a lower initial mortality rate and lower rate of morbidity.(61, 63, 64) The main disadvantages of EVAR are that it requires life-long follow-up and is associated with more late complications including endoleaks and AAA rupture.(61,
65) EVAR was initially only used in high risk patients but has since become widely used in the treatment of AAA.(60) Increasingly EVAR is the most commonly performed repair for AAA in a variety of settings. CV10603 984

