CV108_04R_Ex07
The Hippo pathway is involved with proliferation in a number of tissues. Given the poor capacity for regeneration within adult mammals, the Hippo pathway cascade has been intensively investigated in relation to cardiomyocyte proliferation. In mammals, the Hippo pathway has been observed to regulate heart size. Heallen et al., (2011) inactivated SAV1 in mouse hearts using a conditional knock out. They observed that the activity of the Hippo pathway was reduced in the heart as levels of phosphorylated YAP were decreased. The hearts of the KO mice were enlarged and, although not a lethal mutation, the heart enlargement caused early postnatal death. This enlargement was due to excessive cardiomyocyte proliferation as a result of a complex interaction between non-phosphorylated YAP and ?-catenin. Heallen et al., (2011) concluded that the Hippo pathway inhibits the Wnt/?-catenin pathway to regulate heart size as reducing the level of ?-catenin in SAV1 KO mice reduced the level of cardiomyocyte proliferation. By inhibiting this pro-growth pathway, the Hippo signaling pathway regulates the growth of the heart as it matures from rapid embryonic growth to restricted growth post-natally. In humans, LATS2 mRNA is highly expressed in the heart (Yabuta et al., 2000). LATS2 knockout mice have severe atrial and ventricular defects that lead to embryonic lethality as a result of cardiac insufficiency suggesting an important role for LATS2 in heart development (McPherson et al., 2004).

YAP is essential to regulate cardiomyocyte proliferation. Embryonic genetic ablation of YAP, in mice, results in embryonic lethality as there is reduced proliferation of the cardiomyocytes in the developing heart (von Gise et al2012). Reduced cardiomyocyte proliferation results in cardiac hypoplasia and inadequate function.

For a short period, after birth, mouse hearts are able to regenerate after injury. Porrello et al., (2011) resected the left ventricular apex of mice one day after birth. Twenty-one days after the procedure there was full restoration of the removed myocardium and normal contractile function. Interestingly, this restoration was not from a stem cell population but from the proliferation of cardiomyocytes. This procedure was repeated in mice seven days after birth but no restoration of the myocardium occurred (Porrello et al., 2011), suggesting regeneration is restricted to the first 7 days post birth. This time point coincides with when cardiomyocytes transition from hyperplasia to hypertrophy and become binucleated as the cardiomyocytes undergo nuclear division but not  cell division (Li et al., 1996). Recently, Xin et al., (2013) have extended this period of regeneration potential by overexpressing an active form of YAP. Excess activated YAP increases mouse heart size through proliferation of cardiomyocytes into adulthood, however, the number of proliferating cells severely decreases as the mice age (Xin et al., 2013). Mice with cardiac specific knock out of YAP survive embryonic development but die between the age of 11-20 weeks due to heart failure as a result of ventricular wall thinning and dilated cardiomyopathy (Xin et al. 2013).

Another downstream effector of the Hippo pathway, Transcriptional coactivator with PDZ binding motif (TAZ), is a homolog of YAP and is also phosphorylated by LATS (Lei et al., 2008). Cardiac specific deletion of TAZ does not result in a change in cardiac phenotype but a combined cardiac knock out of YAP and TAZ results in lethality one day after birth (Xin et al. 2013). This suggests an overlapping genetic redundancy between the two but also that YAP has the dominant functional role. The regenerative activity of YAP appears to be through a number of mechanisms involving interaction with multiple genes.

In adult hearts the Hippo signalling pathway is a negative regulator of renewal of the adult cardiomyocytes (Heallen et al., 2011). Inactivation of SAV and LATS1/2 in adult mice hearts resulted in increased cardiomyocyte number and positive staining for EdU, a marker of de novo DNA synthesis. Furthermore, after resection of the cardiac apex, the Hippo pathway deficient mice had regenerated myocardium and reduced scarring (Heallen et al. 2013). Following left anterior descending coronary artery occlusion, to cause myocardial infarction, histological examination found adult Hippo deficient mice had recovered myocardium. Analysis of fractional shortening and ejection fraction concluded that the Hippo deficient mice also recovered function following myocardial infarction (Heallen et al. 2013). Heallen et al., (2013) concluded that postnatally the Hippo signalling pathway is an endogenous repressor of the regeneration and proliferation of adult cardiomyocytes.
1.4.2.2. Apoptosis in the heart
In adult mammalian hearts after stress, such as ischemia and reperfusion, MST1 mediates apoptosis of cardiomyocytes (Yamamoto et al., 2003). This activation of MST1 is thought to be through either a Ras associated domain- containing protein 1 (Rassf1A) -dependent or caspase-dependent mechanism (Del Re et al., 2010). Activation of Mst1, in response to oxidative stress in cardiomyocytes, promotes apoptosis by inhibiting Bcl-xL a pro-survival protein found in the mitochondrial membrane (Del Re et al. 2014). Inhibition of endogenous MST1 improves cardiac function after myocardial infarction by reducing the level of cardiomyocyte apoptosis (Odashima et al., 2007).
Overexpression of LATS2 induces apoptosis in cardiomyocytes (Matsui et al., 2008). This is not observed with overexpression of LATS1 suggesting that the function of LATS1 and LATS2 may be cell type dependent. The precise action of how LATS2 induces apoptosis in cardiomyocytes remains to be elucidated. In other cell types, such as mouse embryonic fibroblasts and human osteosarcoma cells, LATS2 acts through the tumour suppressor protein family (Danovi et al., 2008; Aylon et al., 2006). After birth, cardiac specific homozygous inactivation of YAP causes cardiomyocyte apoptosis and dilated cardiomyopathy and results in premature death. Mice with heterozygous inactivation of YAP did not display an evident cardiac failure phenotype but in response to myocardial infarction had increased cardiomyocyte apoptosis and fibrosis when compared to controls (Del Re et al., 2013).
1.4.2.3. 
1.4.2.4. Hypertrophy in the heart
Work by this lab has reported that in adult mice MST2 is a positive regulator of Raf1 and ERK1/2 activation during cardiac hypertrophy (Zi et al., 2014). Raf1 kinase and ERK1/2 activity are essential components of the MAPK signalling cascade, which has a role in cardiac hypertrophy (Harris et al., 2004). After transverse aortic constriction (TAC) to induce pressure overload, MST2 knockout mice have reduced hypertrophy and fibrosis when compared to wild type mice (Zi et al. 2014). Yang et al., (2015) showed overexpression of YAP leads to increased expression of miR-206 which lead to cardiac hypertrophy following transverse aortic constriction. Also, mice with inhibited miR-206 expression had larger infarcts following coronary ligation whereas gain of function miR-206 mice displayed better outcomes. Yang et al., concluded that miR-206 mediates YAP induced hypertrophy and serves to protect the heart against injury (Yang et al., 2015). CV10807 1096

