CV102_04R_Ex07
The stress response, such as the inflammatory response, plays a key role in regulating IL-10 expression (Li et al., 2008). Inflammation of the central nervous system in particular releases  IL-1 following trauma, neurosurgery, or an increase of inter-brain pressure, this then activates  the stress axis, triggering the release of catecholamines that up-regulate IL-10 production in macrophages (Woichiechowsky et al., 1998). IL-10 has been reported to be co-released  with  IL-1 with the ability to eventually inhibit the production of both IL-1 and TNF-a. A study carried out by Knoblach et al (1998) found that traumatic brain injury was improved with treatment of IL-10 and this was associated with decreased IL-1 in the hippocampus. Collectively these findings provide evidence that IL-10 has the ability to inhibit certain actions of pro-inflammatory cytokines, in some cases by inhibiting their production or release. During this PhD study the  main aim is to identify the signalling pathway IL-10 takes to reduce the inflammatory cytokines in the heart during pathological hypertrophy.

Other studies confirmed the importance of the presence of the IL-10 cytokines during inflammation. Kuhn et al (1993) found that IL-10 deficient mice developed lethal inflammation of the intestines which was inhibited by systemic administration of IL-10. Barbara et al (2000) also demonstrated that IL-10 deficient mice resulted in severe colitis, however there was reduced inflammation in the intestines following administration of IL-10 supporting the previous study by Kuhn et al (1993). In summary again these results indicated that IL-10 down regulated pro-inflammatory responses such as the Th1 response and emphasised the anti-inflammatory properties of IL-10. The Th1 response is the activation of cytokines that produce the pro- inflammatory responses responsible for killing intracellular parasites and for perpetuating the autoimmune responses. Although the studies discussed above indicated that IL-10 administration resulted in the down regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, Powrie et al (1993) and Herfarth et al (1996) highlighted that administration of IL-10 was only successful when administered before the initiation of the inflammatory disease but was ineffective at reversing any established inflammation.
IL-10 has also been shown to act as an antagonist to TNF-a by inhibiting TNF-a induced oxidative stress (Kaur et al., 2006). The systemic release of TNF-a induces  IL-10  via  a  negative feedback mechanism which involves the dependent NF-?B pathway (Meisel et al., 1996). Dhingra et al (2007) found that TNF-a was upregulated via p38  phosphorylation  resulting in cardiomyocyte apoptosis. Data from a study by Ma et al (2001) suggested that the p38 mitogen-activated kinase pathway also regulates the human IL-10 promoter via the  activation of sp1 transcription factor. IL-10 prevented this effect of TNF-a by the  upregulation  of extracellular signal-regulated kinase ERK. However, how IL-10 supresses  TNF-a  still remains unknown. This PhD study aims to investigate the target site of IL-10 signalling which produces a protective role by inhibiting the inflammatory cytokines.

1.8.3 NOVEL RESEARCH INTO INTERLUEKIN-10 AS AN ANTI- INFLAMMATORY CYTOKINE

In relation to existing knowledge regarding IL-10 as an anti-inflammatory cytokine, researchers have investigated the anti-inflammatory cytokine as  a  possible target  to counteract the  effects of inflammation. IL-10 has  been  described as  having protective properties in the development of atherosclerosis by delaying the progress of the  disease  by  significantly  decreasing  cell  death (Mallat et al., 1999). De Waal Malefyt et al (1991) and Romagnani (1995) carried out an investigation of IL-10 on the immune cells which illustrated that the major physiological importance of IL-10 is its ability to limit inflammation, prevent uncontrolled non-adequate immunological reactions and support the humoral Th2 immune response. Another study by Rajasingh et al (2006) also demonstrated that IL-10 inhibited inflammation mediated intimal hyperplasia following carotid artery injury in mice by post-transcriptional mRNA destabilisation on TNF-a. A similar study by Verma et al (2001) also found that IL-10 suppresses the inflammatory response and improves left ventricular functioning and remodelling during acute myocardial infarction. IL-10 suppressed the inflammatory response via the suppression of HuR/matrix metalloproteinase-9 and by enhancing density through activation of the signal transducer and activator  of  transcription 3 (STAT3). These studies all corroborate that IL-10 has the ability to inhibit inflammation during heart failure.

Researchers also investigated the effects of treatment of IL-10 using either overexpression of IL-10 or recombinant IL-10 (rhIL-10). Interestingly Nishio et al (1990) found that treatment with rhIL-10 attenuated myocardial lesions. In addition Verma et al (2001) found that systemic rhIL- 10 administration significantly improved left ventricular function and not only inhibited but also reversed hypertrophic induced cardiac remodelling contradicting Powrie et al (1993) and  Herfarth et al (1996) study that IL-10 is ineffective at reversing any established inflammation. The study also demonstrated that that rhIL-10 significantly decreased hypertrophy, apoptosis, fibrosis, and preserved cardiac function. In further support Stumpf et al (2008) found that treatment with rhIL-10 significantly improves left ventricular function in rats after induced myocardial infarction. The data demonstrated a decrease in TNF-a with administration of recombinant IL-10. This effect was associated with a decrease in the inflammatory cytokines TNF-a and IL-6, a decrease of the chemokines and a reduction of myocardial macrophage infiltration. Powrie et al (1993) stated that the administration of systemic IL-10 release is a powerful tool of the central nervous system  and prevents  hyper  inflammatory processes  via  the activation of the neuro-endocrine axis following  acute stress reactions.  IL-10  deficiency  has been observed and is regarded to have pathophysiological  relevance  in  certain  inflammatory disorders that are characterised by a type 1 cytokine  such  as  psoriasis (Romagnani 1995).

Other studies that investigated the effects of the overexpression of IL-10 found negative findings due to the dampening of the immune system. For example Hagenbaugh et al (1997) demonstrated that overexpression of IL-10 in certain tumours such as melanoma and lymphomas promotes the development of tumours. Another study demonstrated that overexpression of IL-10 in cancer patients increased cancer due to the down regulation of the inflammatory cytokines. Furthermore whether overexpression of IL-10 directly in the heart would increase disease still remain unknown as little research has been carried out in this area. One clinical study by Gullestad et al (2001) has shown that chronic heart failure patients treated with intravenous immunoglobulin had an increase in IL-10 which improved left ventricular ejection fraction, although this is not over-expression. CV10207 1036

