CV108_04R_Ex08
1.4 Targeting the Hippo Pathway in iPS and iPS-CM
There are a number of challenges facing cell therapies; from the first step of isolating cells to their eventual stable and successful long-term integration into the myocardium. Heart attacks and subsequent myocardial infarction result in the loss of millions of cardiomyocytes. For cell therapies to be successful, generating sufficient amounts of cardiomyocytes to adequately replace these lost cells is paramount. Targeting proliferation pathways, such as the Hippo signalling pathway, to enhance the generation of iPS cells and subsequent iPS- derived cardiomyocytes for cell therapies has therapeutic potential.

The first stage of induced pluripotent stem cell production, reprogramming, is currently not very efficient. YAP activity has been observed to enhance the reprogramming of fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells (Lian et al. 2010). Fibroblasts express significantly lower levels of YAP than iPS cells, that have been reprogrammed from the fibroblast population, suggesting YAP contributes to pluripotency (Lian et al., 2010). Further investigation found that potential YAP binding targets include genes which are also targeted by factors, such as Nanog and Oct4, which are essential for ES and iPS cell phenotype. As previously mentioned, knockdown of LATS2 also leads to increased iPS colony formation following reprogramming (Qin et al., 2012).

Animals such as newts and zebra fish are capable of heart regeneration. Recently, the Hippo pathway has been observed to be involved in cardiomyocyte proliferation during newt heart regeneration (Singh, 2013). It is not yet known if modification of the Hippo pathway in stem-cell derived cardiomyocytes will enhance the proliferative capacity and survival of these cells. Cardiac specific knock outs of components of the Hippo pathway result in increased cardiomyocyte proliferation and survival, in new-born mice and adult mouse hearts respectively. Based on this, genetic ablation of components of  the Hippo pathway could enhance the survival and proliferative capacity of iPS- CM and therefore increase the potential of cardiac regenerative therapy.

Dysregulation of the Hippo pathway can result in uncontrolled cell proliferation. As a result, the Hippo pathway is becoming a prominent research subject in the field of cancer biology and potential treatments. Manipulation of the pathway is also of interest in heart disease due to the low regenerative capacity of the heart. Attenuation of the pathway during development results in increased cardiomyocyte proliferation. Increasing the proliferation of cardiomyocytes will advance cell therapy efforts as a potential treatment after myocardial infarction. Currently, a large number of cardiomyocytes which can survive in adverse conditions are needed for cell based therapies to be clinically successful. The phenotype of iPS-CMs are more similar to neonatal cardiomyocytes than adult cardiomyocytes, especially in relation to electrophysiology. As suggested by Chan et al (2014), iPS-CMs will need to have a more mature phenotype to successfully integrate without causing any arrhythmias. Further investigation into enhancing the efficiency of the differentiation and the survival of the generated iPS-CM by targeting the Hippo pathway will increase the therapeutic potential of this form of cell therapy.

This study will consider the role of the Hippo pathway in enhancing the potential of induced pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes (iPS-CM) for use in cardiac regeneration. iPS-CM are regarded as a promising cell type for cell therapy due to their autologous and cardiac phenotype. We targeted this pathway by: 1) Ablating Mst1, the major upstream regulator of Hippo pathway, in skin fibroblasts prior to reprogramming; 2) Overexpressing YAP, the major downstream effector of Hippo, in iPS-CM. CV10808 570

