CV108_03R_Ex06
1.4.1.1. Apoptosis
Apoptosis, a process that removes cells through programmed cell death, is an important process in the development and homeostasis of tissues. The core components of the Hippo pathway (MST1/2, LATS1/2) are established tumour suppressors through their regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis. A number of different stimuli lead to MST1 and MST2 initiating typical apoptosis processes such as caspase cascades, DNA fragmentation and chromatin condensation (Hamilton and O'Neill, 2013). Epigenetic changes to the core components lead to loss of function of their tumour suppressor properties and are associated with a number or cancers (Visser and Yang, 2010). In the liver, genetic deletion of MST1 or MST2 gave resistance to pro-apoptotic stimuli such as FAS and TNF? (Song et al., 2010, Zhou et al., 2009).

LATS2 has been shown to amplify p53-mediated apoptosis through promotion of pro-apoptotic promotors. This augmentation can be overridden by YAP which disrupts the tumour supressing LATS2/p53 relationship (Aylon et al., 2010). Loss of LATS2 has also been shown to increase the resistance of leukaemia cells to chemotherapy drugs through preventing induction of target apoptosis genes (Kawahara et al., 2008). Induction of YAP can enable resistance to apoptosis in response to certain chemotherapy drugs as YAP can inhibit p73- mediated apoptosis (Yuan et al., 2010)
1.4.1.2. Stem cells and embryonic development
Postnatally, another mechanism through which the Hippo pathway moderates organ size is through the regulation of stem cells within tissue. For example, in the mouse intestine the expression of YAP is restricted to the progenitor cells and overexpression of YAP can expand the number undifferentiated progenitor cells causing subsequent increased organ size (Camargo et al., 2007). Disruption of the Hippo pathway in drosophila also leads to increased proliferation of intestinal stem cells (Shaw et al., 2010). In neural tube development over expression of YAP and its binding target TEAD results in neural progenitor cell proliferation and expansion of the progenitor population. This over-proliferation was also observed when upstream members of the Hippo pathway were inhibited (Cao et al., 2008). During differentiation of embryonic stem cells the levels of YAP decrease as activity of the Hippo pathway increases (Lian et al., 2010). From this Lian et al. (2007) also observed that embryonic stem cell differentiation could be inhibited, through the expression of a constitutively active form of YAP (YAP-5SA), and thus maintain stem cell morphology and characteristics. The constitutively active form of YAP (YAP- 5SA) has mutations in 5 sites where phosphorylation by LATS normally occurs (Zhao et al. 2007). In embryonic stem cells, knockdown of YAP can lead to a loss of ESC pluripotency (Lian et al., 2010).

The reprogramming of somatic cells to pluripotent cells requires overcoming the differentiated state. Following reprogramming not all cells become iPS cells, the efficiency of iPS cell generation can be quite low suggesting there are barriers maintaining cell differentiation. Investigating what these barriers are and how they can be overcome could make the reprogramming process more efficient. It is beginning to emerge that the Hippo pathway may have a role in differentiated state maintenance. LATS2 has been found to become downregulated in MEFs that reprogrammed to iPS cells (McPherson et al., 2004). Knockdown of LATS2 with shRNA increases the efficiency of inducing pluripotency in human fibroblasts leading to more human iPS cell colonies forming (Qin et al., 2012). Not only does LATS2 knockdown increase the number of colonies, the colonies also appear earlier in culture.
1.4.2. Function of the Hippo pathway in the heart
1.4.2.1 Development and regeneration in the heart
Cell proliferation occurs mostly during embryonic development and there is stringent control over the growth of an organ and its final size. This control is influenced by a number of factors including hormones and growth factors. Alongside these there are genetic pathways of regulation. Controlling the size of the heart is important to optimise the functional capacity of the organ. The heart has to be large enough to meet the demands of the rest of the body, however, regulation is important as increased heart size can distort the normal anatomy of the heart and cause obstruction to blood flow. During embryogenesis there is hyperplasia of the cardiac cells. Once fully developed, cell division ceases and cardiomyocytes lose the ability to undergo hyperplasia. Further growth of the heart is usually due to hypertrophy of the cardiomyocytes.

The capacity of the mammalian heart to regenerate is poor. Studies in mice have shown embryonic mammalian cardiomyocytes are proliferative; however, this ability to proliferate is lost after birth. Adult mammalian cardiomyocytes have a low capacity to enter the cell cycle and proliferate. Investigations into the capacity for regeneration in humans are limited due to the availability of adult and embryonic human tissue. A small number of studies using radiocarbon dating (Bergmann et al., 2009) and samples of heart tissue from iododeoxyuridine treated cancer patients (Kajstura et al., 2010) have suggested that human hearts do undergo a restricted amount of regeneration, however, this regeneration is not capable of restoring the amount of cells that are lost after myocardial infarction. Unlike mammals, amphibians, such as newts and frogs, have a much higher capacity for heart regeneration. After resection of areas of the heart, newt hearts have been reported to regenerate with a low amount of scarring (Witman et al., 2011). This regeneration is varied depending on the area of resection; however, the regeneration is evidence of the capability of newt cardiomyocytes to proliferate. As with newts, zebra fish also have a high capacity for regeneration of heart tissue. One month after 20% resection of the zebra fish heart, there is little or no scar tissue and the cardiac muscle is restored through cardiomyocyte proliferation to the amount there was before resection (Poss et al., 2002). Importantly, the regenerated cardiomyocytes are functionally integrated into the myocardium (Wang et al., 2011). CV10806 964

