CV105_01R_Ex01
INTRODUCTION
The sinoatrial node (SAN) is the natural pacemaker of the heart and has been studied in detail for over 100 years. In the second century the Greek philosopher and physiologist Claudius Galen observed the heart to continue beating independently when excised from the body.1 It was not until the nineteenth century that the British physiologist Walter Gaskell demonstrated the myogenic origin of the heartbeat, tracing its contractile sequence to the 'sinus venosus' (SV) in the superior right atrium (RA).1, 2 In 1906, from a rented cottage in Kent turned laboratory, the Scottish anthropologist Sir Arthur Keith and his medical student Martin Flack microscopically identified remnants of "primitive fibres" within the SV with similar features to atrioventricular (AV) conduction tissue described earlier that year by Sunao Tawara.3, 4 Keith concluded that the primitive structure in the sinus venosus must be the origin of the cardiac impulse and was subsequently credited for having discovered the SAN.4 Since then, the SAN's histology, molecular features and electrophysiology have been extensively examined and today we continue to add detail to our understanding of the mechanisms involved in SAN automaticity and function.

SAN dysfunction (SND) is seen in human disease causing it to beat too slowly or miss beats. SND is also known as sick sinus syndrome, prevalent in 0.03% of the UK population. SND can lead to dizziness, loss of consciousness and collapse.5 Currently this condition is treated by implanting an electronic pacemaker under the skin and feeding wires into the heart. The prospect is often slightly daunting initially for the patient. However since their invention over 50 years ago, these devices have improved in their reliability, safety, cost and size. They are the only effective treatment for SND to date the latest data suggesting around 40,000 new pacemakers being fitted in the UK per year, about 20% of which were for SND.6

Nonetheless, electronic pacemakers still harbour several inherent drawbacks. These include the need for indwelling hardware, the need to periodically replace generators via further invasive procedures, strong magnetic fields must be avoided, they are unresponsive to the autonomic nervous system and thus have a limited response to demands from exercise and emotion, and there is a small risk during implantation of causing significant bleeding, serious infection or puncturing the lung. Infection can necessitate the need for system extraction which can be complex and dangerous once embedded over time. Furthermore, non-physiological pacing via the right ventricular apex long-term has been associated with ventricular dyssynchrony and cardiomyopathy.7

In the last 15 years, the concept of 'biopacemaking' has arisen. Through advances in our knowledge of the molecular biology of the SAN and developments in gene therapy, we can now employ techniques such as the injection of engineered viruses into cardiac muscle to transduce pacemaker genes and create ectopic SAN-like pacemaker tissue anywhere in the heart. Thus we have the potential to emulate the electronic pacemaker without the need for implantation of an external energy source or wires, whilst also being sensitive to the autonomic nervous system.8, 9 There is also potential to repair dysfunctional pacemaker tissue by reverse engineering molecular abnormalities that occur in SND. However, biopacemaker research is still in its infancy and there are many challenges remaining including the search for the right gene targets, the best location for a biopacemaker and safe methods of delivery. The ideal biopacemaker should be robust, reliable, have similar physiological functional parameters to the SAN and respond to autonomic regulation. Once these challenges have been overcome, the biopacemaker could become a viable alternative therapeutic option to the electronic pacemaker.

1.1	Embryonic development of the sinoatrial node
In mammals, the initial heart tube forms from two regions of the lateral plate mesoderm during the gastrulation stage of embryonic development.10 A caudal pool of progenitor cells remain which continue to extend both poles of the heart tube.11 All cells in this primary myocardium are poorly differentiated and display slow automatic sinusoidal electrical activity.12 As the heart chambers develop, most cells differentiate and proliferate quickly into atrial and ventricular 'working myocardium'. They express high conductance gap junctions and ion channels, increased numbers of mitochondria and sarcomere components. This leads to rapid impulse propagation but loss of automaticity.10

Three discrete areas do not differentiate into working myocardium. These are the SV, the AV canal and the outflow tract (figure 1).12 Instead these areas retain their primary character with slow automatic electrical activity. A dominating rhythm arises from the SV.13 The development of a conduction pathway via fast working myocardium interrupted by these slow primary tissues will eventually give rise to a recognisable electrocardiogram (ECG) and this basic pathway is conserved in all vertebrates with multi-chambered hearts.12 Higher vertebrate animals go on to develop a more complex SAN within the SV and atrioventricular node (AVN) within the AV canal. Different species develop these to different extents, for example larger animals have evolved more defined systems.10

The differential developmental lineage of the cardiac conduction system (CCS) and working myocardium is directed by specific genes. Nkx2-5 is a homeobox gene (homeobox genes are a family of genes that direct early structural embryonic development) that drives working myocardial development. By day 10.5 of embryonic development in mice Nkx2-5 is apparent in working myocardium, but absent from the sinus horns developing from the SV.14 Nkx2-5 is thought to activate working myocardial genes such as Nppa and the high conductance gap junctions Connexin (Cx) 40 amongst others.14 Nkx2-5 also represses genes specific to CCS development such as the transcription factor Tbx3 and the pacemaker ion channel gene Hcn4 limiting the border of the developing CCS.14 Conversely Tbx3 present in the developing CCS represses Nppa and Cx40, the downstream atrial genes of Nkx2-5, and so the CCS and working myocardium become mutually exclusive with a defined border.14, 15

Transgenic mice were used to investigate the interactions of Nkx2-5 and Tbx3. In one study Nkx2-5 deficient mice died at day 10, they failed to initiate chamber development, Nppa and Cx40 were not activated, and there was marked ectopic expression of Tbx3 and Hcn4 throughout the heart tube.14 Tbx3 deficient mice died between day 11 and 13, but interestingly at day 11.5 a junction between Nkx2-5/Nppa/Cx40 positive and negative myocardium still formed at the SV, along with a SAN-like structure with Hcn4 present, suggesting that Tbx3 is not required for initial definition but for later fine tuning of the CCS gene program. [Figure 1 removed] CV10501 1061

