CV101_01R_Ex_02_pp.18-27

In the liver, full-length adiponectin activates adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and the trimeric form is known to activate AMPK in adipose tissue and muscle. Activation of AMPK leads to phosphorylation of Acetyl-Coenzyme-A Carboxylase (ACC) which results in fatty acid ?-oxidation and inhibition of triacylglycerol and fatty acid synthesis (Liu et al., 2010); (Kadowaki et al., 2005). 

Deng et al. have demonstrated that adiponectin improves endothelial dysfunction by increasing nitric oxide (NO) production via phosphorylation of endothelial NO in the aorta of high-fat-fed obese Sprague-Dawley rats (Deng et al., 2010). Moreover, in adiponectin receptor-KO mice, there is a significant attenuation of endothelium-dependent vasodilatation in response to ACh (Ouchi et al., 2003). Of relevance, adiponectin suppresses both basal and oxidised-LDL induced superoxide generation in bovine endothelial cells (Motoshima et al., 2004), and also suppresses excess ROS production under high-glucose conditions via a cAMP/PKA-dependent pathway (Ouedraogo et al., 2006). Given the elevated levels of oxidised-LDL (Holvoet et al., 2008) and plasma glucose in patients with metabolic syndrome, the concomitant reduction in adiponectin levels may explain partly the endothelial dysfunction observed by our group (Greenstein et al., 2009) in the cohort of patients with MetS.

Incubation of healthy human vessels with a blocking peptide for the adiponectin R1 receptor almost abolished completely the anticontractile effect of PVAT in response to cumulative noradrenaline doses (Greenstein et al., 2009). Our unpublished proteomic analysis of adipose tissue from obese patients shows a significant reduction in adiponectin levels as compared with lean individuals. Therefore we suspect that the absence of the anticontractile function of PVAT in obesity is accounted for by a reduction in adiponectin levels in PVAT at least in part. It has been suggested that the high levels of adiponect in in some disease states may be a compensatory response to the development of 'adiponectin resistance' (i.e. a dysfunction in the adiponectin signalling pathway) (Sam et al., 2009). Clearly, further research is required to describe the exact mechanisms of action of adiponectin in health and to explain how these pathways become affected in disease.


Adrenomedullin
Amongst the adipokines, adrenomedullin (AM) has received the least attention in recently published literature. It is a 52 amino acid peptide first isolated from a sample of human phaeochromocytoma, but later shown to be synthesised by adrenal, heart, and vascular endothelial and smooth muscle cells as well as white adipocytes of both rodents and humans (Fukai et al., 2005; Silaghi et al., 2007). Its dose-dependent vasodilator effect on the rat mesenteric vessels was first reported in 1993 (Nuki et al., 1993). Its direct and potent vasodilatory action on blood vessels would suggest that it plays an important role in the control of vessel tone. Human studies have shown that intravenous infusion of the peptide leads to significant vasodilatation of pulmonary vessels providing a potential therapeutic strategy for pulmonary hypertension (Nagaya et al., 2003; Nagaya et al., 2000). Also there is evidence of AM-induced human coronary (Terata et al., 2000) and skeletal artery (Nakamura et al., 1997) vasodilatation via a nitric oxide dependent pathway.The exact role of adrenomedullin in obesity needs further evaluation, but we know that AM reduces levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in vascular smooth muscle cells (Yoshimoto et al., 2005), and AM knockout mice express higher levels of ROS (Shimosawa et al., 2003).

Catecholamine stimulation of beta3 adrenoceptors on adipocytes results in lipolysis and release of stored adipokines (Robidoux et al., 2006). Adrenomedullin inhibits lipolysis via a nitric oxide dependent mechanism (Harmancey et al., 2005) which in theory, would affect vessel tone indirectly by blocking the release of vasoactive adipokines such as adiponectin (Figure 2). Gettys et al have reported that stimulation of the beta3-adrenergic receptor on white rat adipocytes by the selective agonist CL316,243 leads to the inhibition of the release of leptin (Gettys et al., 1996). The balance between the potential lipolysis- induced release of adiponectin and the inhibition of leptin release and their relevance to vascular tone needs further clarification.

Epicardial adipose tissue from patients with CAD displays higher levels of adrenomedullin than those without CAD. Given its vasorelaxant properties, one would assume this may serve as a protective mechanism for the diseased coronary vessels (Shibasaki et al., 2010). Plasma AM concentrations are also elevated in disease states, which may provide further protection against oxidative stress and vasoconstrictors. Despite its antioxidant and vasorelaxant properties, it is possible that elevated AM levels in disease states  may actually contribute to the vascular dysfunction.
PVAT and control of local vascular tone
Perivascular adipose tissue function has been assessed in canine, swine and rodent models and demonstrated different functional and structural properties of PVAT which vary both between species and anatomical site. Examples of structural differences include the fact that PVAT from rat aorta comprises smaller adipocytes compared with mesenteric vessels (Galvez-Prieto et al., 2008). Whilst the murine thoracic aorta is surrounded by brown adipocytes, peri-abdominal fat is comprised of white adipocytes (Police et al., 2009).  From a functional perspective, coronary artery PVAT in healthy dogs attenuates acetylcholine induced relaxation (marker of endothelial function) (Payne et al., 2009; Payne et al., 2008), but does not affect bradykinin-mediated dilatation in healthy pig arteries (Payne et al., 2010).

Three studies have shown that healthy human PVAT exerts an anticontractile effect on adjacent vessels. Rodent (both mouse and rat) mesenteric and aortic vascular beds have been the most frequently studied models of PVAT function. Data from these models have matched closely the data obtained from limited human studies. 

In 1991, Soltis and Cassis were the first to report that vessels with intact PVAT were less responsive to noradrenaline than naked vessels (Soltis et al., 1991). Later studies used solution transfer protocols to demonstrate the existence of a transferrable adventitium- derived relaxing factor (ADRF) (Gao et al., 2005b; Greenstein et al., 2009; Lohn et al., 2002; Malinowski et al., 2008). The solution transfer experiments involved using a small volume of solution from a tissue bath with PVAT, adding it to a pre-constricted vessel and measuring the vascular response. These suggest that the observed anticontractile property of PVAT is not merely a consequence of it acting as an obstacle to diffusion for vasoconstrictors, but as a dynamic tissue which secretes adipokines with anticontractile properties. CV10102 1031

