CV104_02R_Ex03
1.2.2 Environmental exposure and epigenetics
Genetic predisposition in isolation is obviously insufficient to lead to disease development as vasculitis is not a "classically" inherited disease, and remains relatively rare. For many autoimmune diseases, epigenetics (the study of "mechanisms that determine and/or perpetuate heritable genomic functions without changes in DNA sequence"42) has helped to explain the "two hit theory" of disease susceptibility and disease development following environmental exposure. In AAV the environmental exposure that leads to development of disease is far from certain and is likely to differ according to patient. However, there have been several well described associations which deserve some focus here.

Exposure to silica has been reported as a trigger for AAV in addition to other autoimmune and respiratory diseases. A systematic review of the literature examining the possible association with AAV was published in 201343. This found an association with "ever" having been exposed to silica and subsequent development of AAV with a summary OR of 2.56.
Hypotheses to explain this association include the causation of neutrophil apoptosis by silica and trapping of silica in alveoli leading to a systemic inflammatory response through T cell activation. However, to prove a definite association prospective longitudinal studies are ideally required which remain unlikely due to the disease rarity.

Other possible occupational exposures associated with AAV development include farming. A recent German questionnaire study found a strong association between reported regular farm exposure and development of GPA, with the strongest association for those with regular exposure to cattle44. Both of these possible environmental risk factors were detailed in a New Zealand case- control study, with reported associations to disease (GPA) development including exposure to silica and grain dust, occupation as a farm worker or having undertaken specific gardening activities45.
1.3 THE ROLE OF INFECTION IN DISEASE PATHOGENESIS
Although occupational exposure may well for some be the trigger for disease development, perhaps the most extensively observed and explored hypothesis is the link between infection and AAV. Sixty-three percent of patients with GPA, compared with 25% of healthy controls, have been found to have chronic nasal carriage of Staphylococcus aureus46. The persistence of nasal carriage of S. aureus has been found to strongly increase the risk of relapse in this population47. Several mechanisms have been suggested to explain this including S.aureus super- antigen stimulus of B and T cells, neutrophil priming and molecular mimicry46. The use of anti-staphylococcal agents including co- trimoxazole has been shown to support disease control with reduction in the rate of relapses48. The protective mechanism of this anti-microbial is uncertain but one possibility is that it may be mediated through an alteration of the balance of nasal flora49. Others had postulated that perhaps S.aureus proteins and ANCA target epitopes were homologous, with a theory of molecular mimicry. However, this was found to not be the case.

In 2004, an alternative "theory of autoantigen complementarity" was investigated. Prendergraft et al. discovered that a proportion of their patients with AAV appeared to additionally be producing an antibody against an epitope present in the central portion of the PR3 antigen, an antibody they named "complementary PR3" (cPR3). They demonstrated that not only did mice injected with the cPR3 antigen produce cPR3 antibodies but they also produced PR3 antibodies50. The discovery that the cPR3 epitope shared homology with pathogens including Staph.aureus gave rise to the theory that the formation of cPR3 antibodies may provide the missing link between infection and the pathogenesis of vasculitis. Subsequently Tadema et al.51 were unable to find any association between levels of complementary PR3 and disease activity in those with AAV, and conversely actually found that levels of cPR3 activity appeared to be lower in those with vasculitis than healthy controls. They were also unable to find any association between cPR3 levels and exposure to S. aureus (as defined by being a nasal carrier of S. aureus). However, they did accept that it was possible that the formation of anti- cPR3 and anti- PR3 complexes may be masking true measurement of cPR3 activity. Adding strength to these theories is the observation that Staph. aureus has been shown to trigger NET formation52.

Multiple other pathogens have been described in association with ANCA production53. Kain et al. have focused on a possible mechanism of molecular mimicry between a protein (FimH) on the fimbriae of gram- negative pathogens and the antibody LAMP-2. They postulated that other, currently unmeasured antigen targets, aside from MPO and PR3, may be responsible for inducing ANCA production. They discovered that antibodies to the heavily glycosylated protein LAMP-2 were detectable by immunofluorescence in 95% of their AAV population54, but absent in their healthy controls. They went on to demonstrate the potential pathogenic nature of these antibodies by inducing glomerulonephritis in rats through injection of LAMP-2 antibodies, and further showed that immunisation of the rats with FimH protein not only induced LAMP-2 antibody formation but was also capable of stimulating the development of a clinical picture of glomerulonephritis and pulmonary haemorrhage compatible with vasculitis. However, work attempting to validate these findings in other cohorts has yet to be successful. Investigators from Chapel Hill, North Carolina have attempted to replicate this work in a cohort of 329 patients with AAV glomerulonephritis, healthy controls and patients with Gram-negative urinary tract infections (UTIs)55. They found that LAMP-2 antibodies were present in only 21% of their patients with AAV but also in 16% of patients with UTIs. They were also unable to replicate induction of glomerulonephritis in the rats through immunisation of the LAMP-2 antibodies.

Two individual groups have demonstrated a less specific link between infection and vasculitis by stimulating B cells in from patients with AAV in vitro with bacterial DNA56,57. Both groups demonstrated that ANCA production could be provoked by B cell exposure to CpG deoxynucluotides (hypomethylated DNA found in bacteria and viruses). In both studies, however, these responses were more pronounced in those PR3 positive patients than MPO positive, reinforcing the link between this particular AAV and infection.
Essentially further work is required to try to elucidate this link between exposure to infectious agents and development of vasculitis. CV10403 1010

