CV107_01R_Ex01
1.1  Overview
Vascular calcification is an active, regulated process in which vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and other cell types from the vascular wall undergo osteogenic differentiation and apoptosis, and deposit a matrix that becomes mineralised. This pathology commonly occurs during human ageing and disease, and has many similarities to embryonic bone formation. The presence of vascular calcification is a major risk factor for cardiovascular-related morbidity and mortality in the developed world. Over the past two decades intense research has begun to understand the molecular mechanisms involved in this debilitating condition, but as of yet, no therapies exist to either prevent or reverse this pathology. The bioactive sphingolipids have also rose to prominence over the last twenty years as they have been demonstrated to regulate multiple cellular processes, including apoptosis and the regulation of pro-cell survival responses. Furthermore, the bioactive sphingolipids, ceramide and sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), have recently been implicated in bone formation and homeostasis. Thus, the hypothesis of this PhD study is that the bioactive sphingolipids, ceramide and S1P, regulate vascular calcification.
The introduction to this PhD thesis will first give the reader an overview of vascular calcification, where it occurs and the clinical consequences of its presence. The key processes that lead to the initiation of vascular calcification will then be highlighted, as will the inhibitors and promoters of the pathology. Finally, the cell signalling pathways that are activated or altered during the initiation of vascular calcification will be discussed. The next part of the introduction will provide an overview of sphingolipid biology, including the synthesis and metabolism of the various members of the family, and how they are transported to their subcellular locations. The bioactive signalling properties of ceramide, sphingosine and S1P will then be described as will their potential to regulate signalling pathways and cellular processes that are known to be altered or implicated in the initiation of vascular calcification. Other areas of sphingolipid biology relevant to vascular calcification will also be highlighted. Information will then be provided with regards to how the enzymes that control the levels of ceramide and S1P are regulated and activated.
1.1 Introduction to vascular calcification
Vascular calcification is the inappropriate and pathological deposition of mineral in the form of calcium phosphate salts into the vascular wall (Figure 1.1 A). The pathology was first described in the 19th century by the eminent pathologist Rudolf Virchow (Virchow, 1989) and examinations of ancient Egyptian mummies and a naturally preserved "ice-man" have shown that vascular calcification has been present in humans for at least five thousand years (Murphy et al. 2003; Allam et al. 2011). In 2009, a meta-analysis of thirty studies that had previously investigated the association of vascular calcification and mortality was performed (Rennenberg et al. 2009). This study concluded that the presence of calcification in any arterial wall is an independent risk factor for future cardiovascular events and is associated with a 3-4-fold increase in mortality (Rennenberg et al. 2009). The presence of vascular calcification is commonly found in patients suffering from chronic kidney disease (CKD), type II diabetes mellitus (TIIDM) and atherosclerosis (Zhu et al. 2012). Ectopic calcification is also an inevitable consequence of ageing; a study involving over 400 asymptomatic individuals demonstrated that vascular calcification was detected in 84% of subjects aged 50-60 and 95% of subjects aged 60-70 (Allison et al. 2004). Vascular calcification can occur within atherosclerotic plaques, cardiac valves and in the walls of the aorta, coronary and peripheral arteries (Demer & Tintut, 2008). Clinically, vascular calcification is referred to as calcific vasculopathy and four different classes exist based on their anatomical location: intimal calcification, medial calcification, calcific uremic arteriolopathy and cardiac valve calcification. [Figure 1.1 removed]

Intimal calcification is exclusively seen in atherosclerotic plaques (Figure 1.1 B) and is the most common form of calcific vasculopathy (Demer & Tintut, 2008). The clinical consequences of intimal calcification include thrombus formation, stroke and myocardial infarction, although the direct effect of intimal calcification on plaque rupture and stability remains controversial (Pugliese et al. 2015). Medial calcification (also known as M?nckeberg's arteriosclerosis), as illustrated  in Figure 1.1 C, occurs in the tunica media of arteries and is typically localised circumferentially along the internal elastic lamina (Shanahan et al. 1999). This form of calcification is most prevalent in patients with CKD, but is also found in patients suffering from TIIDM and during ageing (Lanzer et al. 2014). The clinical consequences of medial calcification include arterial stiffening, hypertension and heart failure (London et al. 2003). Furthermore, the presence of medial calcification in patients with TIIDM can lead to increased morbidity due to a higher incidence of lower limb amputations (Lew et al. 2015). Intimal and medial calcifications occur independently of each other, however, in patients suffering from CKD and atherosclerosis, or TIIDM and atherosclerosis, both intimal and medial calcifications have been observed in the same arterial segment (Demer & Tintut, 2014).

In contrast to intimal and medial calcifications, which are detected in large arteries, calcific uremic arteriolopathy (previously known as vascular calciphylaxis) is a distinct form of medial calcification that affects the small to medium sized arteries and arterioles. This is a rare form of calcification that leads to thrombotic ischaemia and a painful necrotizing skin condition associated with a mortality rate of 50-80% (Wollina, 2013). The final form of calcific vasculopathy, cardiac valve calcification, is distinct from the other forms as it occurs in cardiac valves. Calcification of cardiac valves is common in the elderly population and its presence is associated with a 50% increase in mortality due to cardiovascular-related complications (Otto et al. 1999). As this study is focusing on calcification of the vasculature, cardiac valve calcification will no longer be discussed herein (the reader is directed to the review by Towler, (2013) for more details on cardiac valve calcification).

1.2 Key processes during vascular calcification
Features reminiscent of embryonic bone formation (also known as ossification) have been identified in areas of vascular calcification. Mineralised tissue, cartilaginous metaplasia and osteoblast-like cells have been detected in areas of human intimal and medial calcification (Qia et al. 2003; Tyson et al. 2003). Furthermore, fully formed trabecular bone has been identified in areas of human intimal calcification (Hunt et al. 2002) and hydroxyapatite, the characteristic mineral of bone, is found as the predominant mineral in areas of vascular calcification (Duer et al. 2008). Many of the key processes involved in ossification are also active during the initiation of vascular calcification and appear to be essential for the development of ectopic calcification, as discussed below. CV10701 1076

