CV106_02R_Ex04
A number of comparative studies between open AAA repair and EVAR have been performed. The EVAR1 trial randomised 1082 patients with AAA >5.5cm who were fit for open repair to either EVAR or open AAA repair found initial mortality to be lower in patients who underwent EVAR, (1.6% Vs 4.6%). However, secondary interventions were 75% more common in the EVAR group.(66) The mid- term results of this study found EVAR to have no impact on all-cause mortality, but to be associated with a higher rate of re-intervention higher costs.(67) The long-term results of this study found survival to be similar between the patients who underwent open AAA repair and those who underwent EVAR. EVAR was however associated with more frequent need for AAA related re-intervention and late AAA rupture.(65) An additional randomised controlled trial of 351 patients randomised to open AAA repair or EVAR found similar mortality rates to the EVAR1 trial at 30 days.(61) At 2 years the cumulative survival between the groups and rate of survival free of complications were the same.(68) Similar findings have also been demonstrated in a large propensity matched registry study.(69) EVAR has also been compared to no-intervention in patients unfit for open AAA repair but was not found to improve overall survival or AAA related mortality.(70

EVAR is increasingly being used as a treatment option for ruptured AAA, (71) and is being assessed in on-going randomised controlled trials.(72, 73) It has been suggested that between 40-50% of ruptured AAAs are anatomically suitable for EVAR.(74, 75) Systematic reviews of studies in which patients that have undergone EVAR for ruptured AAA have found a pooled mortality of under 25%, (76, 77) however these analyses are likely to be subject to selection bias and the results of the randomised controlled trials are awaited.(78)

Risk prediction modelling is important in elective AAA repair for a number of reasons. Firstly as there are two main options available for AAA repair both with quite different short and long-term risks accurate estimates of procedural risk are vital. The importance of clinical decision making and informed consent is emphasised by the fact that most patients with AAA are asymptomatic and an increasing number are being identified through screening programmes. Well informed clinical decision making in these patients is vital to ensure that elective AAA repair improves AAA related survival. In addition named individual surgeon outcomes following elective AAA repair are now published in the United Kingdom (UK). To avoid any adverse consequences of this publication it is vital that the outcome data published is adequately risk-adjusted.
1.6 Cardiac surgery
Cardiac surgery is surgery performed on the heart or great vessels by opening the pericardium. Each year approximately 35,000 patients undergo cardiac surgery in the UK alone.(79) Cardiac surgical procedures can be grouped into surgery on the coronary arteries, surgery on the valves of the heart, surgery on the thoracic aorta, surgery for congenital heart disease and cardiac transplantation. Surgery on the heart was thought to be impossible until the late nineteenth century when there were a number of successful reports of repairs of stab wounds to the heart.(80) Early attempts at performing more complicated procedures such as pulmonary embolectomy, mitral valvotomies and surgery for congenital heart disease were often ineffective or associated with a high mortality rate. This led to a number of strategies being explored to facilitate more complex cardiac surgery including hypothermia, cross circulation and cardiopulmonary bypass.(80) The first successful open heart procedure using a heart lung machine and cardiopulmonary bypass was performed in 1953, (81) with the first case series reported in 1955.(82) It was the advent of cardiopulmonary bypass that led to the
unprecedented growth in the scope and volume of cardiac surgical procedures seen over the past fifty years.

Cardiac surgery has been the surgical speciality that has led the way with regards to risk prediction modelling. The need for accurate risk prediction models in cardiac surgery has been driven by the early publication of surgical outcome data and the need for adequate risk-adjustment. Increasingly risk prediction models are being used to facilitate clinical decision making and informed consent in cardiac surgery although the risk-adjustment of surgical outcome data remains their most high-profile and controversial application. The rest of this chapter will focus on the background of the three main procedural groups that make up the vast majority of contemporary adult cardiac surgical practice. These groups also represent the major procedural groups included in the cardiac surgery risk models studied in this programme of research.
1.7 Coronary artery bypass grafting
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) is performed to treat coronary artery disease which has various clinical presentations including angina, myocardial infarction and ischaemic cardiomyopathy, collectively referred to as ischaemic heart disease (IHD). These clinical presentations are due to a variety of underlying pathophysiological mechanisms including plaque related obstruction of coronary arteries, coronary artery spasm, microvascular dysfunction and left ventricular dysfunction secondary to prior myocardial infarction.(83) Coronary artery disease can be treated with medical management, percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), CABG or a combination of the three. These different treatment modalities have been extensively studied and guidelines recommending which patients should be treated with which treatment modality have been produced.(84) CABG is generally reserved for patients with the most significant coronary artery disease or multi-vessel coronary artery disease and has been shown to be associated with better outcomes compared to alternative treatment strategies in these patients.(84-86)

The aim of CABG is to improve circulation to the myocardium by bypassing stenotic lesions affecting the coronary arteries using a conduit taken from elsewhere in the body. This bypasses the diseased segment of coronary artery rather than attempting to restore blood flow through the disease segment of artery as is the case with PCI. The first successful coronary artery bypass was performed in 1960 using a hollow metal tube to connect the right internal mammary artery to the right coronary artery.(87) In 1967, the first series of CABG procedures performed via a left thoracotomy without using cardiopulmonary bypass and utilising the mammary artery was reported.(88) Since CABG surgery was first performed, extensive research has been performed to refine and develop techniques to improve outcomes.

CABG surgery can be performed with or without cardiopulmonary bypass. Performing CABG surgery without cardiopulmonary bypass avoids the need for systemic anti-coagulation and may reduce the risk of stroke. However there are concerns that performing CABG surgery without cardiopulmonary bypass results in incomplete revascularisation due to technical difficulties. There is no clear evidence as to which technique is associated with the best outcomes.(89, 90) Practice amongst surgeons is varied wit h approximately 20% of cases performed in the UK without cardiopulmonary bypass.(91) CV10604 1104

