CV103_02R_Ex03
1.4 Cellular electrophysiology of the sinus node
Subsequent to the elegant experiments by Lewis demonstrating the initiation of the heart beat in the sinus node, several attempts had been made to identify the electrical phenomenon making spontaneous activity possible but it was not until 1943 that the spontaneous depolarization of the natural pacemaker was recorded by Bozler 25. The action potentials of the sinus nodal cell and the working myocyte are significantly different; whilst the latter has a stable negative resting potential, the former has a less negative and gradually rising membrane potential culminating in a propagating wave of excitation. The action potential is a result of a sum of ionic currents; inward currents (that is positively charged ionic movement into the cell) and outward currents (figure 5). The roles of individual ion currents in pacemaking were elucidated by using blockers of specific ion channels in vitro, measuring currents with voltage clamp techniques and utilising genetically modified "knock- out" animal models. Despite extensive research, no theory of pacemaking has been accepted universally, and the issue remains hotly debated. The next chapter summarise the perceived contribution of various ion channels and cell coupling proteins to impulse formation within the sinus node and its transmission to the atrial myocardium. [Figure 5 removed]

1.4.1 "Funny current" (If)
The funny current was named after its unusual characteristic; unlike many other currents, it activates on hyperpolarisation (i.e. at a more negative membrane potential). It carries mostly Na+ and, to a lesser degree, also K+ and Li+ and resulting in a net inward current 27-29. The corresponding ion channel is the hyperpolarisation activated cyclic-nucleotide gated or HCN channel, of which 4 isoforms have been identified (HCN1-4) 30. The mammalian heart expresses HCN 1, 2 and 4, whereas isoform 3 is found in the brain. Working atrial and ventricular myocardium expresses small amount of HCN2, whereas HCN 4 and 1 are found abundantly in the sinus node suggesting an important role of the funny current in pacemaking. Several functional experiments corroborate this possibility. Blocking the channel specifically by Cs+ led to a significant increase in sinus cycle length in the rabbit 31. Ivabradine, a now commercially available, If inhibitor was able to lower the heart rate in human by an average of 9 beat/minute and gained licence for treatment of stable angina32,33. Recently, two independent groups demonstrated, that cardio specific, induced and temporally controlled deletion of HCN gene or destruction of HCN positive myocytes result in profound sinus bradycardia followed by atrio- ventricular block in the mouse, associated with high mortality 34,35. The effect of reduction in HCN channels proved to be due to extension of the slow depolarization phase during diastole 33. On the other hand, studies using genetically manipulated mice for a decreased If current showed only modest bradycardia and retained chronotropic response 36. Clearly, the funny current has a role in pacemaking, but its exact contribution is uncertain.
1.4.2 K+ currents
As previously stated, the sinus node does not have a stable resting potential; this is due to the lack of the "inward rectifier" K+ current (IK,1). This current, despite its name, is an outward current under physiological conditions, which keeps the membrane potential hyperpolarised throughout diastole in the atrial and ventricular working myocardium preventing the cells from depolarising spontaneously 37. Knocking out the Kir2 channel (responsible for the IK,1 current) in the ventricle of the guinea pig permits pacemaker activity to emerge, albeit unreliable and slow 38. During the action potential other K+ currents are activated. At the beginning of repolarisation, a transient outward current is measured (Ito ) , selective blockade of the current results an increased cycle length in isolated "cell- balls" from inferior part of the sinus node in the rabbit, but has no effect on the strands of tissue obtained from the more superior nodal region suggestive of regional differences within the natural pacemaker39. The family of delayed rectifier K+ currents (IK) activates later during the repolarisation phase, it consists of at least 3 different subtypes: ultra-rapid, rapid and slow currents; called IKur, IKr, IKs respectively 40. Selective partial blockade of IKr reduces the slope of the action potential, hence increases cycle length within the sinus node 41. Higher concentration of the same blocking agent completely ceased spontaneous action potential generation in isolated myocytes of the rabbit 42.
1.4.3 Na+ current
The inward sodium current is well known to be the responsible current for rapid depolarization of the working myocardium throughout the heart. It is principally carried by Nav1.5 ion channel and encoded by the SCN5A gene. According to classical teaching it has no role in spontaneously beating pacemaker cells. However, genetic mutation of SCN5A in human has been associated with familial sick sinus syndrome either isolated or manifested together with long QT syndrome 43,44. Furthermore, blocking Na+ current with tetrodotoxin reduces the upstroke velocity of action potentials in the periphery but not in the centre of the sinus node 45. In contrast, abolishing Ca++ current with nifedipine did not stop the sinus node firing; only the centre of it ceased activity 46 . The implication is that sodium current is available in the periphery, and it may be able to contribute to impulse generation as a backup mechanism and at the same time, it helps the centre of the sinus node to drive the heart by acting as an interface between the less negative sinus node and the working atrial myocardium. The latter has been verified by demonstrating that block of INa in the periphery of the sinus node causes exit block 7.
1.4.4 Ca++ currents
Two different types of voltage dependent Ca++ channels can be found in the mammalian heart including the sinus node: the "long-lasting" L-type Cav1.2 and 1.3 and the transient T-type Cav3.1 through 3.3 responsible for the ion current ICaL and ICaT, respectively.47. As discussed before, upstroke of the action potential generation in the centre of the sinus node is dependent on the L-type calcium current, whereas the periphery can beat even if this current is blocked. Transgenic knock-out mice for Cav3.1 have a bradycardic phenotype with sinus arrhythmia48 and blockade of the same channel in isolated sinus nodal cells of the rabbit slows the heart rate by 14%49. CV10303 1032

