NMS208_1R_Ex01

Introduction to the chapter

This chapter sets the foundations for this thesis, discussing both its focus and purpose. Outlined are the overall aim and objectives along with the underlying questions which are placed in the policy context. Ideas upon which this study builds and the personal motivation of the author are provided as is the structure of the thesis. To begin, there will be an explanation of definitions and terminology and associated rationale.
Definitions and terminology

The mental health legislation discussed in this thesis is the Mental Health Act 1983, England and Wales as amended by the Mental Health Act 2007, England and Wales and referred to throughout as the Mental Health Act. This study's central concern is one amendment of the Mental Health Act, the introduction of the Approved Mental Health Professional; a reconfigured role that, in the original legislation, was exclusive to the social work profession and at that time entitled the Approved Social Worker. The role is now renamed the Approved Mental Health Professional to reflect this change. Introduced under the Mental Health Act, the role of the Approved Mental Health Professional was first implemented in November, 2008. The fulfilment of it is the focus of the present study.

There are contemporary counterparts of the Approved Mental Health Professional in other countries of the United Kingdom. It is known in Northern Ireland as the Approved Social Worker and in Scotland as the Mental Health Officer, neither of which are opened up to other, non-medical, professionals. Nonetheless, throughout this thesis there is a generic reference to all incarnations as approved mental health practitioners and the work undertaken as approved mental health practice. Where there is a need to refer to the particular embodiment, past or present, the specific title will be used in full. The one acronym present is AMHP which, when used, refers to the Approved Mental Health Professional in England and Wales.

Approved mental health practitioners have a statutory duty under the Mental Health Act to determine if the criteria for formal detention in hospital of an individual with a mental disorder have been met and, if so, to decide whether and how a detention, if recommended, should proceed. This assessment of mental disorder is a medical decision carried out by eligible doctors who recommend hospital admission based on this opinion. The process of decision making by approved mental health practitioners will be referred to as an assessment. In order to undertake an assessment, the decision maker is required to judge, given all the circumstances including an individual's social situation and the availability and suitability of alternative non-medical services, whether an application for detention in hospital is the best available option. This process will be referred to as an application.

In England and Wales, Guidance for Approved Mental Health Professionals is set out primarily in a Code of Practice that accompanies the Mental Health Act (Department of Health, 2015) which in effect translates the legislation into practice. Those mental health professionals eligible to be considered for this role are required to undergo a formal assessment of their competence as regulated by the Health and Care Professions Council (Health and Care Professions Council, 2013) and a process which, when successfully accomplished, is referred to as being approved. The Approved Mental Health Professional role is then a statutory one. It involves making a decision, about, and being the applicant for, the formal detention in hospital of a person with a mental disorder.

The fulfilment of approved mental health practice has two aspects. The first is instrumental; this involves the coordination of the assessment, before and during, and includes taking into account and dealing with the person's social and domestic circumstances. The second is moral; this is the understanding that fulfilment is underpinned by an independent, non-medical perspective. Together these aspects have become known as the social perspective.
Aim and objectives of the thesis

The overall aim of this thesis is to explore the role and experiences of approved mental health practitioners in order to understand what impact, if any, professional background has on role fulfilment. The focus of the study is currently practising Approved Mental Health Professionals in England and Wales and its objectives are threefold. The first is to explore perceptions of the role and the influence of professional identity on approved mental health practice. The second is to determine and understand professional identities as internalised and applied in approved mental health practice including in relation to attributes such as skills and values. The last is to examine any emotional and psychological aspects involved in undertaking approved mental health practice from each research participant's perspective, including practitioners' self-esteem and aspirations. The thesis has a number of underpinning questions:

* Does any profession have an exclusive ability to fulfil the instrumental and moral aspects of approved mental health practice? 
* Is the non-medical perspective specific to the profession of social work? 
* Can the social perspective of approved mental health practice be fulfilled irrespective of professional background? 
* Does professional background have any impact on the fulfilment of approved mental health practice? 
The questions arise from the policy context in which the research is taking place, the historical context, the previous research upon which it is built and the personal motivation of the author, as will now be outlined.

Historical context

The historical development in England and Wales of approved mental health practice has its roots in the Poor Laws, later enshrined in the Mental Health Acts of 1930 and 1959. Mental Welfare Officers, as they were termed under the Mental Health Act 1959 and later Duly Authorised Officers oversaw admissions to hospital. Psychiatric Social Work meanwhile, a separate role, had its origins in nineteenth century philanthropy and undertook therapeutic work in child guidance clinics or mental hospitals. Both were perceived in two distinct ways; the former concerned with admissions, the latter with therapeutic intervention (Miles et al., 1961, Gostin, 1975, Rolph et al., 2003, Webber, 2008). Psychiatric Social Workers also were closely aligned to psychiatrists (Pargiter and Hodgson, 1959, Timms, 1964). NMS20801 1000

