NMS201_05R_Ex09
2.9.5.3.i Topical oils
Five RCTs considered the use of topical oil for preterm skincare (appendix 8). One study was only provided in abstract form and quality assessment was therefore limited (Hu and Zhang 2014). Different oils were investigated so it was difficult to compare all of the studies together. Darmstadt et al. (2004) conducted an RCT of 103 babies (<34 weeks gestation) in India comparing sunflower seed oil with no oil. The main outcomes were skin scores, sepsis and mortality. The study suffered from declining numbers for follow-up due to the high rate of mortality which can be expected in this high-risk population. Even so, significant improvement in skin condition was found in the treatment group together with a significant reduction in infection. Another study found no difference across groups for infection (n=428; Hu and Zhang 2014). However, Hu and Zhang's study did find that the use of sunflower seed oil resulted in significantly less dermatitis than commercial baby oil (Johnson & Johnson Consumer Companies, Inc) and that both oils resulted in significantly
less dermatitis than using no oil. In contrast, Kanti et al (2014), a small RCT (n=22) comparing sunflower seed oil against no treatment, found that sunflower seed oil may impede skin barrier development. The use of sunflower seed oil in Darmstadt's (2008; 2005) work had a substantially significant improvement in infection rates (41% less likely to develop infection) and mortality rates (26% reduction in mortality). It is possible that the positive effect found by Darmstadt was due to the antimicrobial effect of sunflower seed oil which would explain the beneficial effect on infection and mortality rates.

A small RCT in Greece (Xatzopoulou et al. 2010) of 35 very low birthweight preterm babies compared the use of olive oil to no treatment. The outcomes under consideration in this study were infection and mortality. No differences between groups were found and the authors conclude that olive oil appears to be well tolerated by preterm babies. It would have been useful to include skin condition as an outcome. Another RCT conducted in France (Vaivre-Douret et al. 2008) included preterm babies (31 - 34 weeks gestation) and compared sweet almond oil, ISI04 blended oil or placebo with no treatment. The main outcomes were weight, growth, neurological and psychomotor development. Stratum corneum hydration and clinical observations were also reported. Unfortunately statistics for hydration and clinical observations were not provided and the authors were approached for this information (not received at time of submission). The study found significantly improved moisturisation in both oil groups, and quicker recovery of dermatological conditions in the ISI04 blended oil group. These results are limited for this review as the sample size was powered on the primary outcome of weight gain, not skin condition.

2.9.5.3.ii Topical emollients
Eight studies compared various emollients, seven of which were RCTs and one a small observational study (appendix 8). The observational study (Rutter and Hull 1981) observed the effects of a paraffin mixture (80% soft and 20% hard paraffin BP) on preterm babies (n=3 [number not absolutely clear]; 26 - 32 weeks gestation) and found decreased trans-epidermal water loss maintained six hours later. Five of the RCTs included Aquaphor(tm) as a treatment group (Erdemir et al. 2015;Brandon et al. 2010;Edwards et al. 2004;Pabst et al. 1999;Nopper et al. 1996) with babies between 26 and 33 weeks gestation. None of these five studies had identical outcomes. Brandon et al. found no difference in trans-epidermal water loss between Aquaphor(tm) and No-Sting Skin Protectant. The use of Aquaphor(tm) had the highest (worse) skin condition score but both treatments were within normal range. Nopper et al. found that the use of Aquaphor(tm) resulted in significantly reduced trans-epidermal water loss and better skin condition compared to the control group. However the control group were able to use a water-in-oil ointment (Eucerin(r)) as required and this may have had an effect on the results. Edwards et al. conducted a large multi-centre RCT of 1,191 preterm babies. The trial compared Aquaphor(tm) to no treatment but reported that 34% of babies in the control group also received ointment therapy for an average of 4.1 days due to a misinterpretation of the protocol, which may have affected the results. The study found that babies in the treatment group had significantly better skin condition and less skin injury than controls. One study of 197 preterm babies investigated neonatal sepsis as an outcome when Aquaphor(tm) was compared to no treatment (Erdemir et al 2015). The study found no difference between groups. The final RCT investigating Aquaphor(tm) against usual skincare was a small study of 19 babies (Pabst et al. 1999). At follow-up, only 16 babies remained although the reason for this loss is unclear. Again Aquaphor(tm) was found to improve skin condition.

Of the two other RCTs, one investigated Bepanthen(r) ointment against a lanolin (70%)/olive oil (30%) cream against no treatment (Kiechl-Kohlendorfer et al. 2008) and the other compared routine skin care to Eucerin(r) (water-in-oil) cream (Lane and Drost 1993). In the first study, there is a discrepancy in the reporting of numbers lost to follow- up; approximately 25% are unaccounted for. Babies treated with the cream had significantly less dermatitis, and both treatment groups had better outcomes than the control group. In this study the olive oil cream had the best outcome; however, the olive oil is diluted by the volume of lanolin in the composition of the cream. The study by Lane and Drost also found that the treatment group (Eucerin(r)) had less dermatitis. This study had more than 50% loss to follow-up for which the reason is not reported. The result should therefore be interpreted with caution. Both of these studies could be affected by attrition bias, where the loss to follow-up results in incomplete outcome data and consequently, systematic differences between the groups (Higgins and Green 2009). Lane and Drost is a seminal piece of work and the skin scoring assessment tool (table 2.1), which was introduced in this study, has been used by many researchers since.

2.9.5.3.iii Topical oils versus emollients
Although there were four papers (appendix 8) that compared oils and emollients, all papers resulted from the same RCT (Darmstadt et al. 2008; 2007; 2005;Ahmed et al. 2007) but reported different outcomes. NMS20109 1032

