NMS206_01R_Ex 02
Other issues are related to the implementation of the structured family interventions for carers in developing countries because they are time consuming, costly and usually require highly trained personnel (Chakrabarti et al. 2011); although to some extent these attributes are also pertinent in more developed countries such as the UK (Ince 2014, Okpokoro 2014). In a review of 22 studies investigating the implementation of family intervention based on the guidance of the National Institute for Health and Carer Excellence (NICE 2009), it was found that the average implementation rates for 53% and this varied across services in the UK. The most frequent barriers reported in the studies were a lack of professionals who were capable of delivering the family intervention, and limited funding for training and staff recruitment (Ince 2014). It is argued that such barriers might continue, given the most up-to-date NICE guidance (NICE 2014) demands the professionals to have a high level of competence for conducting at least ten planned sessions over three months or a year. However, despite the high levels of competence, professionals may find that it is difficult to implement the skills they have acquired due to time and caseload pressures (Ince 2014). The reported barriers are systemic wide difficulties which are found at all levels of mental health services in the UK (Ince 2014); and these might be more apparent in less developed countries like Indonesia where issues of limited human resources, scarce qualified mental health services, and difficult access to the services are dominant (Shinfuku 1998, Irmansyah 2010).

1.3.1. Mental health services in Indonesia

The Republic of Indonesia is a country in the Southeast of Asia with a total population of 237, 641, 236 people (Statistics Indonesia 2010) (Figure 1). It is estimated that 0.46% of the population experience a serious mental Illness (Basic Health Survey 2007). From 33 provinces in the country, Jakarta as the capital province is facing a serious problem of managing mental illness, as the prevalence of severely mentally ill people in the city i.e. 2.03% is higher than the national rate. It can be assumed that currently there are over one million people living with a serious mental illness in Indonesia, and 221,000 of them are living in Jakarta. [map rempved]

People with a serious mental illness in Indonesia are mostly treated in mental hospitals, especially when they are acutely unwell (Directorate of Mental Health Service 2005b). This service follows a referral to a general hospital or a Public Health Center (known as Puskesmas, a governmental primary health care centre in the sub-district level). Following hospital-based treatment, service users are discharged back to the families. It is important to note that families in Indonesia play an important role in making decisions about the treatment for their mentally ill relatives (Minas and Diatri 2008). For example, it is not uncommon that families determine whether the relatives should receive treatment from traditional/spiritual healers or mental health professionals.


Despite the rising rate of mental health problems in Indonesia, mental health service provision is generally poor (Directorate of Mental Health Service 2011d). This is due to a number of reasons that include a limited budget for the services and insufficient information and education about mental health amongst lay people that has an impact on stigma and discrimination. Other challenges have been identified including insufficient mental health professionals and medication, lack of carer and community empowerment, and limitations in rehabilitation programs/interventions in the community (Directorate of Mental Health Service 2011d).


The complexity of the mental health system in Indonesia is highly influenced by difficulties in accessing mental health services (Directorate of Mental Health Service 2011d). As an archipelago country comprising of 17,000 islands, Indonesia has problems in distributing mental health services to remote areas. Even in areas of a high population density, the access problems are obvious due to very limited services. For example, there are only 48 mental hospitals with a capacity of 7,700 beds, while the World Health Organisation recommends 80,000 beds for over 1 million of mentally ill people (Directorate of Mental Health Service 2011d).


1.3.2. Services for carers of people with mental health problems in Indonesia
One of the major issues of mental health provision in Indonesia is related to the needs of carers of people with serious mental illnesses (Directorate of Mental Health Service 2011d). This is the focus of this PhD. Although ad hoc services for carers are available, they remain in their infancy. It is unclear what services and information are available for carers at a national level either from hospitals, governmental policy or non-governmental agencies (Non-Governmental Organizations/NGOs). More importantly there is a paucity of research related to services for Indonesian carers. With regard to the services, professionals in mental health hospitals have offered information to individual or groups of carers related to mental illness through periodical programs, but there is no consistency of the nature or content of such information or indeed information about whether carers find such information helpful. There is no literature to suggest that emotional and practical support are routinely provided to carers. A small minority of psycho-education programmes are provided by a few nurses who are undertaking higher studies but no widespread or consistent evaluation programme has been completed.

1.3.3. The needs of carers in Indonesia

Identifying the needs of carers from services is important because it can be used as a basis to develop an intervention for carers that may maximise their potential success (Mairs and Bradshaw 2005). This is essential to avoid repeating limitations such as failure to involve carers from the established interventions for carers. The existing services commonly have been designed and delivered without involving carers. Hence, they are provided by professionals on the basis of pragmatic reasons e.g. reducing relapse became the main goal of these early interventions (Pharoah 2010).
NMS20602 962

