NMS201_05R_Ex10
Ahmed's study investigated the massage practices of 497 RCT participants. The RCT compared sunflower seed oil, Aquaphor(tm) or no treatment in preterm babies (<33 weeks gestation). All participants completed the baseline survey; however only 121 completed the follow-up questionnaire. Although most of these were lost due to the high mortality rate (n=281), the reason lost was not reported for 39 of the initial participants. This study may have benefitted from a qualitative element to explore more deeply the views and experiences of parents. Of interest in the results of this study was the reporting of oils commonly used by parents on their babies in Bangladesh. Mustard oil was most commonly administered (88%), shown in an animal study to be harmful to skin (Darmstadt et al. 2002). After the study, many parents preferred Aquaphor(tm) (42%) and perceived that sunflower seed oil and Aquaphor(tm) were superior to mustard oil. However 29% of parents reported that they would continue to use mustard oil, which indicates the strong tradition of using this oil in this population.[Table 2.1 removed]
Darmstadt's papers report various outcomes of the same RCT as Ahmed: infection (2005), mortality (2008), skin scores and skin blood cultures (2007). This was a robust study with intention-to-treat analysis and a high rate of adherence to the treatment regimen. Babies treated with sunflower oil were 41% less likely to develop nosocomial infections, had a 26% reduction in mortality rates against controls, and a better skin condition score compared to the control group. The alternative treatment (Aquaphor(tm)) also resulted in a 32% reduction in mortality and equally better skin condition score than control group. Topical administration of sunflower oil reduced the passage of pathogens from the skin surface into the bloodstream, implying antimicrobial properties

2.9.5.4 Term baby studies
Ten papers investigated the use of oils and emollients in term babies (appendix 8). Only one considered olive oil (Erenel et al. 2010). Six papers were RCTs; two of which comprised one study reported in abstract form (Simpson et al. 2012) and then in full (Simpson et al. 2014).

One RCT (Garcia-Bartels et al. 2010) compared methods of bathing term babies, with two groups incorporating the use of an emollient after bathing. These two groups showed significantly lower trans-epidermal water loss and higher stratum corneum hydration. This was a single-centre study in Germany (n=64). The randomisation process and power calculation were not given so it is unclear if this was robust, and if the results are inferential, for example it is not reported if allocation was concealed. This makes it difficult to determine if there was selection bias (Altman and Schultz 2001). The data collection methods were valid and reliable, and there was no loss to follow-up. It is not reported whether assessor-blinding was incorporated in the methods which may be a source of observer bias (Schultz and Grimes 2002). It is unclear whether parents may have used other products during the treatment period which may have contaminated the results. The cream used was Body Cream Penaten(r) and although the study was partly funded by the manufacturer of this product, it was investigator-led with the funders having no influence over study design, conduct, analysis, interpretation or dissemination.

The BEEP pilot study (n=124; Simpson et al. 2012), published in abstract form, reported a pattern in the emollient group towards improved skin barrier function where this outcome was measured in a subset of babies (n=32), but no significant differences were found between the intervention and control groups. The BEEP pilot study is an on-going multi- centre study, involving four centres in the UK and one in the USA. It aims to assess the feasibility of a daily full body emollient therapy to prevent onset of atopic eczema in those at risk of developing the condition. The pilot study had an 87% completion rate; allocation concealment was maintained to minimise selection bias (Schultz and Grimes 2002); assessors were blinded to treatment allocation reducing observer bias (Altman and Schultz 2001); and although the study consisted of a small pilot sample, the definitive trial is ongoing in the UK. For those babies randomised to the intervention arm, the parents chose which intervention they preferred from a specific emollient cream / gel, a defined sunflower seed oil with a high linoleic acid / low oleic acid content or a specific emollient ointment, with most choosing the emollient cream (67.2%). Only 23.4% (n=15) of participants in the intervention arm chose sunflower seed oil. Although not reported this may provide an insight into parental preferences. It is not possible to separate the results which are specific to the sunflower seed oil as the findings were presented as a total of participants in the treatment arm. Furthermore, the study was not powered to detect this. The full report of the pilot suggests that a daily full-body emollient therapy from birth can prevent atopic eczema (Simpson et al. 2014).

Horimukai et al (n=118; 2014) also conducted an RCT at the same time as the BEEP study (Simpson et al. 2014) addressing the prevention of atopic eczema, and appeared to be modelled on Simpson's study. It is unclear what the randomisation process involved and whether a power calculation was performed; the authors state that the study may suffer from being under-powered. Although the authors report that the sample size was 118 babies, the actual number who consented was higher (n=128). The number of babies who continued to endpoint at 32 weeks was reduced to 99 babies (completion rate 77.3%). For other aspects of critical appraisal this was a high quality, robust study; for example, the study was assessor-blinded which minimised the chance of observer bias (Schultz and Grimes 2002) and used validated data collection tools. This study came to the same conclusion as Simpson's study (2014) using a different emollient (Shiseido 2e Douhet Milk Baby Lotion); that the use of a daily emollient therapy from birth significantly reduces the incidence of atopic eczema in those with a genetic predisposition to the condition. The ethics review board requested that all participants were also prescribed petroleum jelly, which may have affected results; however, as this was an RCT any effect of this additional treatment should have been evenly spread across the intervention and control groups. NMS20110 1032

