NMS205_03R_Ex06
Under the Equality Act 2010, which applies to England, Wales and Scotland, Deaf people are regarded as disabled, rather than a linguistic minority group. The Act states that organisations have a duty to make reasonable adjustments to meet the needs of an individual. However, the term 'reasonable adjustment' is open to interpretation. For example, one could be offered subtitles on video material, yet these may not be fully accessible for a Deaf person whose preferred language is BSL.

3.2 Non-signing deaf people
As previously stated, there are some deaf people (who might have similar hearing levels to Deaf people) who do not use sign language. This may be as a result of personal choice or because of a lack of opportunity to meet Deaf people. The fact that the majority of parents of deaf children are hearing (Mitchell & Karchmer, 2004), together with the decline in the number of specialist schools for deaf children has meant some Deaf people may not be offered the opportunity to be part of the Deaf community until later in life (Ladd, 2003).

The integration of disabled children into mainstream settings emanated from the Warnock Report (1978) and was reinforced by the UNESCO Salamanca Statement (1994). Both reflect the social model of disability (Lindsay, 2003). However it can be argued that the needs of d/Deaf children are different to those with a physical disability as deaf children have specific language/communication needs, they do not face physical barriers to access. In 2005, Baroness Warnock admitted that there may have been some confusion following the Warnock Report (1978) and acknowledged that inclusion in mainstream settings was not suitable for all children (Warnock, 2005). This was further acknowledged at the Education and Skills Committee meeting who stated: "It is also important to remember that specific groups view separate schools as a more effective route to inclusion, and as a means of maintaining cultural and linguistic identity, such as within the Deaf community." (House of Commons Education and Skills Committee, 2006, p. 134).

3.2.1 Type of schools and mental health outcomes
There are mixed findings in studies of mental health outcomes of deaf children/young people dependant on the type of schools they attended (mainstream school or deaf school). Hindley (1993) reported that those d/Deaf people who attended mainstream school have poorer mental health in comparison to those who attended deaf schools. However, Van Eldik (2005), who included hard of hearing pupils as well as deaf pupils in the sample, reported that young people at deaf schools had a higher prevalence of mental health problems compared to those who attended mainstream school or hard of hearing schools. What is not clear is whether there were any d/Deaf pupils in the mainstream school that took part in the study. Without both d/Deaf and hard of hearing children in the study, it would be difficult to make comparisons. Both Van Eldik (2005) and Hindley (1993) conducted the study when deaf young people were still at school.
Whilst it is acknowledged that Van Eldik (2005) modified the assessment into plain English, it could be argued that this would remain a problem for those with poor literacy skills and that this may have affected the results. Although in Hindley's study (1993) validation assessment was used, there are again some findings that should be taken with caution; for example some of the 'parents' reports were completed by house-parents at the boarding school. In a retrospective study of Bat-Chava (1994), it was found that group identification (amount of d/Deaf friends and level of involvement with the Deaf community) moderated the effect resulting from the type of school attended on self-esteem. That means that if the Deaf person identified more strongly with their peer group, then there is less association between the type of school they attended and their self-esteem. It is therefore suggested that a key factor in the development of self-esteem is whether an individual feels that they identify with their peer group and whether they feel that they are part of the community.
3.3 Identities in transition
The definition of identity has been raised in academic discussion (Kroger, 2007). There are two main types of identity; social identity (which defines the self as part of group identity) and personal identity (Hogg & Vaughan, 2002). For example, deaf people from hearing families who first encounter the Deaf community later in life, may start to explore what it means to them to be a d/Deaf person (Valentine & Skelton, 2003) and depending on the individual's situation, they might experience identity confusion. Identities do not always remain fixed however, as they sometimes change throughout one's life and can depend on the situation, this is known as situated identity (e.g. a deaf person may be experienced differently by others when with hearing families or at their place of work; they may also emphasise or de-emphasise different facets of their identity depending on situation and context).

For many years Deaf adults have advocated for Deaf children to be taught together as there is a belief that this will promote a positive sense of identity and pride (Ahmad et al., 1998). In many ways the needs of a deaf child are different to those of a physically disabled child, for example if a hearing child who is a wheelchair user is placed in a mainstream setting, the school would ensure that there is a ramp available to ensure that the child can access the building. However, for a d/Deaf child (who might be the only deaf child in a school), there are communication barriers both inside and outside the classroom and because of this they are very likely to experience a feeling of isolation (Oliva, 2004). NMS20506 946

