NMS208_1R_Ex02

The concept of generic social work, and the creation of unified local authority social services departments in 1971 (Seebohm, 1968) in effect brought together the two mental health roles and arguably resulted in the loss of specialist social work mental health skills. A new impetus to mental health social work came with Mental Health Act 1983 which created the role of the Approved Social WorkerThis role was to conduct a social assessment of the individual's circumstances and investigate the possibility of using other services to avoid the need for a hospital admission, but there continues to be uncertainty in mental health social work about what the role of social work is in community mental health services.Developments during the 1990s initiated integration of services in mental health and began to challenge the idea of discrete professional roles. A National Service Framework for Mental Health (Department of Health 1990a), mandated services across England which, most commonly, included the setting up of multi- disciplinary teams managed within Mental Health Trusts such as Community Mental Health Teams and later Crisis intervention, Early Intervention and Assertive Outreach Teams and also encapsulated in further policy (Department of Health 1990b). These developments signified a shift from social care to health care and the uncertainty contributed to the reported stress experienced by Approved Social Workers (Hudson and Webber 2012) and declining numbers (McNicholl, 2016). But, even though an integrated mental health practitioner role has become more commonplace after 2000 than before, this shift has not been wholesale, albeit has implications for whether or not other non-medical mental health professionals such as nurses, occupational therapists and psychologists, could be envisaged in an Approved Mental Health Professional role. Some mental health social workers were directly employed by Mental Health Trusts, and others remained located in social care services, employed by Local Authorities.

Meanwhile, under Section 75 of the National Health Service Act 2006, mental health social workers have been seconded to health care or Mental Health Trusts, but remained employed by Local Authorities. This increasing overlap between professional roles gave rise to a typology of attitudes; traditionalists, eclecticists and generecists (McCrae et al., 2004). Traditionalists favoured a distinct social work discipline, eclecticists favoured a mixture believing that professional identity should be retained and generecists saw little difference between the various professions (McCrae et al., 2004 pp. 312-313). Other studies have explored and defended the influence of social work in mental health (Gilbert, 2003, Nathan and Webber, 2010), and explored the development of the Approved Mental Health Professional (Rapaport, 2006). More recently The College of Social Work established five roles for mental health social work which includes the provision of professional leadership for Approved Mental Health Professionals (The College of Social Work, 2014 p. 6). Different arrangements following devolution in the United Kingdom have resulted in the peculiarity of the Approved Mental Health Professional role which, unlike its counterparts in Scotland and Northern Ireland, has been opened up to other non-medical professionals in part to mitigate the effect of declining numbers of social workers.

Policy developments 2000 onwards

Government policy in England and Wales regarding mental health workers in health and social care from 2000 onwards has been underpinned by a growing trend towards integration of the workforce and the belief that most tasks can be undertaken by any worker irrespective of professional background. Two broad policies encapsulate this development. The first concerns New Ways of Working in Mental Health as it is referred to generically. The second concerns the Government's reform of mental health legislation in England and Wales, and in particular, the outcome of this legislative process which gave rise to the reconfiguration of some statutory roles. Together, these    policy drivers provide the context for this research.

New Ways of Working in Mental Health

New Ways of Working in Mental Health is a national workforce programme in England and Wales led, on behalf of the Government, by the National Institute of Mental Health in England (Department of Health, 2007) and determined by two aims. The first is to review traditional working practices of mental health professionals and the second to encourage multidisciplinary working. The overall goal of this policy is to encourage all professionals to share collective responsibility for providing appropriate mental health services. Concentrating initially on the consultant psychiatrist (Department of Health, 2005a), the New Ways of Working initiative was later directed to the wider mental health workforce including, of specific relevance to this thesis, social workers, nurses, occupational therapists and psychologists. Of most interest is the policy's stated rationale: to see how professional roles could be extended; to think in terms of competence not profession and to share knowledge, skills and competences across professional and practitioner boundaries (Department of Health, 2007 p. 10).
Reform of the Mental Health Act: the reconfiguration of statutory roles

Running parallel to New Ways of Working was the desire by the then Conservative Government to reform mental health legislation in England and Wales. After a protracted period of consultation and debate, the Mental Health Act was eventually amended only. Among the amendments, and mirroring the overarching move towards integration, is the introduction of reconfigured roles, the first being those of the Approved Clinician and the Responsible Clinician. Each of these Clinician roles can be filled by a range of mental health professionals including registered medical practitioners, registered psychologists, first level nurses whose field of practice is mental health or learning disability, registered occupational therapists and registered
social workers. In order to be able to undertake the role Approved Clinicians have to meet competencies as outlined in Schedule 2 of the Approved Clinician Directions and the associated guidance (National Institute for Mental Health in England, 2008). A Responsible Clinician is the Approved Clinician who has been given overall responsibility for a patient's case and who undertakes the majority of the functions previously performed by what had hitherto been known as Responsible Medical Officers, or consultant psychiatrists.

The second reconfigured role is that of the Approved Mental Health Professional opened up to the same mental health professionals as the Approved Clinician, with the exception of registered medical practitioners. The competencies for this particular role are outlined in Schedule 2 to the Mental Health (Approved Mental Health Professionals) (Approval) (England) Regulations 2008 and the associated guidance (National Institute for Mental Health in England, 2008). 
NMS20802 1051

