NMS202_05R_Ex10
In a cross sectional survey using questionnaire, dietary recall and anthropometric survey to estimate the quality and quantity of diet, identify feeding practices and modifiers of iron and zinc in the diet of 163 children between 0 and24 months in Malawi, Hotz, and Gibson (2001) found that children ate food of two types of consistency. Children under 6 months ate light phala, maize flour porridge and children above 6 months of age ate hard phala. Although the exact consistencies of these foods were unclear from the report, they showed that there was an attempt to feed children with foods that seemed to fit their functional ability. Similarly, in Pelto and Armar-Klemesu (2011) study in Ghana, they explicitly concluded that children's diet was differentiated by age. Pelto and Armar-Klemesu (2011) employed a free listing strategy to obtain an emic inventory of child diets. Mothers listed different types of porridge as the food for children between 6 and 8 months old. The consistency of porridge in the Ghanaian context ranges from nectar thick to pudding thick liquids. Nectar thick liquids are generally of a consistency similar to tomato juice and will pour easily but with a greater resistance than water (CT.gov, 2016). Pudding-thick liquids, on the other hand, are the most resistant liquids when being poured (CT.gov, 2016). These consistencies appear to be similar to the consistencies of foods recommended for children between 6 and eight months of age (Brown et al., 1998; Dewey, 2003). According to Pelto and Armar-Klemesu (2011), mothers listed what were generally considered as family foods for children between 19 and 24 months old. However, the results did not show what consistency of foods children between the ages of 8 and 19 months ate.

The results of the review showed that mothers' might not consider diet consistency in child dietary decisions. The ability of a child to eat food that meets his or her nutritional needs depends on the functional maturity of his or her neuromuscular system (Fox, 1996). Food textures and consistency should be compatible with the physiological ability of children to eat. Root, suck and swallow reflexes are present at birth for breastfeeding, and breast milk is a thin liquid that can be consumed with those two reflexes (Brown et al., 1998). One study, (Matsuyama et al., 2013) reported on how the maturity principle was used to decide child diet consistency. In this study (Matsuyama et al., 2013); participants suggested that children's throats were not mature enough to receive solid foods. Even though this reason appears physiological, the information provided does not indicate whether "immature children's throat" meant the same to participants as the technical advice given by health professionals. This suggests that children might be missing opportunities to obtain nutrients because their food might be diluted to the extent that nutrient levels might be lowered even when there is a variety food in the diet. Some children may also be at risk of harm from choking because they are receiving foods they are not able to swallow at their age. Additionally, there is evidence suggesting a critical window for introducing children to lumpy foods, after which it might be difficult to get children to eat such lumpy foods (Northstone et al., 2001). Consequently, feeding children with the wrong consistency of food either too early before they are ready to receive it, or too late, has implications for their nutritional status, safety, and their attitude towards food.


2.12.2 Child Feeding frequency
The recommended frequency of a child's daily feeding is guided by gastric capacity and the nutrient density of local foods (WHO, 2005). The review reports suggest that after a child was introduced to food other than breast milk, the number of daily feeds was inconsistent, especially in the case of children who continued to breastfeed (Baye et al., 2012; Bezner Kerr et al., 2008; Hampshire et al., 2009; Fouts and Brookshire, 2009). Only one cross sectional paper (Gibson et al., 2009) which explored the feeding of children between 6 and 23 months in Ethiopia reported that children between the age of 6 and 8 months were regularly fed 2 meals a day in addition to breastfeeding. However, this feeding frequency declined with increasing age, with a reduction of 25% within the 8 to 24-month age group.
Feeding frequency generally did not depend on the age of a child (Bezner Kerr et al., 2008; Mwangome et al., 2010) though this is recommended (WHO, 2005). In Niger, mothers did not have regular times to feed children (Hampshire et al., 2009). Mothers only fed children when they cried, reached out for food when others were eating or when a child could talk and verbalise their need for food (Hampshire et al., 2009). Additionally, children below five years of age had two meals a day, breakfast, and lunch, because dinner was observed to be ready at 8 pm when children were asleep. Similarly, in their study in Tanzania, even though they did not report on the exact frequency of daily feeding, Mwaseba and Kaarhus (2015) found that mothers sometimes prioritised other activities such as farming over child feeding. This irregular and inadequate feeding frequency suggests a high potential for chronic hunger in children.
2.13 Child feeding influences
The papers reviewed demonstrated that sociocultural and economic factors affected child feeding either directly or indirectly, in most of the study settings.
2.14 Poverty, food insecurity and food production
The economic structural context within which culture operates was reported in most of the papers as an important factor in child feeding.

Food availability and accessibility were identified in the review as impacting on child feeding (Kimani-Murage et al., 2011; Nordang et al., 2015; Hampshire et al., 2009; Matsuyama et al., 2013; Mwangome et al., 2010; Paul et al., 2011; Sellen, 2001a). In rural Tanzania, Nordang et al. (2015), assessed nutritional status, feeding practices and risk of undernutrition in a study of 152 children under five years olds. They identified that economic indicators such as income generating activities and food availability were linked to underweight and growth stunting in children.  Although their statistical analysis did not show a direct link between food availability, economic indicators, and the feeding practices, their study found suboptimal feeding practices like children eating from only one food group a day and non-exclusive breastfeeding.NMS20210 1044

