NMS208_3R_Ex07

Skills: inter-personal

Other instrumental aspects of approved mental health practice are identified in the literature review. These are skills similar to what might ordinarily be expected of professions whose work involves inter-personal activity and include communicating, building rapport and keeping things calm (Bowers et al., 2003 p. 965). Obtaining and asking others to share information about the person being assessed is also reported (Bowers et al., 2003), but attracts no other attention from the authors other than to comment that the quality and amount of information was seen to vary depending upon location and timing of request. This finding mirrors the sense of information flows during assessments also found by Quirk et al. (2000).

Setting out to examine what is referred to as the assessment team or personnel involved in the assessment, including doctors as well as approved mental health practitioners, a further survey sought to explore the levels of access and communication, the barriers practitioners encountered and also to ascertain need for more training in managing severe cases (Fakhoury and Wright, 2004 p. 665). This study's design was a postal questionnaire sent out on a random basis to a selection of community mental health teams, collating data on demographics of practitioners and asking questions about communication with other professionals, training needs and information needs. It was concluded that the majority of respondents reported not being able to manage people with severe mental health problems and had information needs in various areas of their work. The research recommended better access to information on clinical assessments and mental health law.

 But, this study is flawed. As the authors acknowledge, information was obtained only on respondents who were Approved Social Workers so therefore no comparison could be made with medical participants. Whilst it achieved a 56% response rate (111 questionnaires) the authors do not compare this with the overall number of potential respondents (3,463 as reported by Huxley and Kerfoot, 1994). In addition, the questions lack an opportunity for respondents to provide qualification. For example, when asking about the necessary training and skills to successfully manage people with severe mental illness answers sought either a yes or no response with no opportunity to indicate the reason. This reason might simply have been the desire on the part of the respondent to undertake ongoing development, an unclear interpretation of severe mental illness or the respondent may have been new to the role. The conclusions also lack context. The authors state that the reported difficulties in communication between the respondent and General Practitioners are worrying not least because they are supposed to be working together as members of the community care team. This is a lack of operational understanding of the role of the aim of Approved Social Work. Nonetheless, for the purposes of the current review, this study does make some interesting comment in relation to the barriers approved mental health practitioners experience, namely bureaucracy, contact and communication problems. It goes on to recommend a proper discussion with a nationally representative sample of such practitioners concerning how to address these needs (Fakhoury and Wright 2004, p. 674), but such an exercise, if it has happened, is not available publicly.

The literature on the instrumental aspects of approved mental health practice emphasises the importance of coordination; a skill that is required throughout the assessment process. A significant analysis and discussion of these aspects was presented by Quirk et al. (2000) and to a lesser extent by Davidson and Campbell (2010). Data from several studies also indicate that in order to accomplish approved mental health practice there is a need to employ inter-personal skills (Quirk et al., 2000, Bowers et al., 2003). However, the relationship between professional background and these aspects has not been widely investigated and it is therefore not possible to ascertain from existing research whether professional background has any impact on approved mental health practice. One study (Fakhoury and Wright, 2004), claimed that Approved Social Workers lack knowledge both of mental health symptoms and of legal processes but is flawed. Nonetheless, the central importance of training for approved mental health practice emerges as a theme in the review indicating perhaps that approved mental health practice has knowledge that is expected and can be acquired through teaching. It is to this aspect that this chapter now turns.
Skills: Knowledge

In a large scale study undertaken in order to explore mental health social work more generally, it was concluded that Approved Social Work requires special knowledge and training (Fisher et al., 1984). The acquisition of knowledge through training has been explored in a number of studies. In one (Christian, 1985), the author sought to understand what is meant by appropriate competence, terminology which is sometimes used to suggest that an individual is deemed capable of undertaking a certain role once judged as such. Comparing and contrasting five sample cases referred for assessment under the Mental Health Act 1959 with five under the Mental Health Act 1983, the aim of the study was to explore whether there were any significant differences in the way in which assessments were conducted (Christian, 1985). However, no significant differences were found. Instead, lack of adequate resources, both of alternative services and also of training, was seen to be problematic. The lack of alternative services is an issue to which this review returns. Of significance to this part is the suggested lack of adequate training and the timing of these studies, undertaken as the 1983 Mental Health Act embedded.

In more recent years the impact of training has been shown to have a slightly more positive impact, although this is not consistent. One study concluded that although the Approved Social Workers interviewed held positive views about their training, in all cases there was room for improvement (Haynes, 1990 p. 196). Another extensive study indicates that the improvement may have taken place (Campbell et al., 2001). Using a variety of research methods to examine perceptions about the practice, supervision and management of Approved Social Workers, a questionnaire first piloted with approved mental health practitioner in two health trusts in Northern Ireland was later distributed to all such practitioners in the geographical area. Of relevance to this part of the review the questionnaire had a mixture of multiple choice questions on rates of satisfaction with various aspects of training and perceptions of confidence and competence in their role. Respondents were also asked to comment on what problems they faced. 243 responses were received representing 84% of the possible returns. Methods of data collection and analysis are reported in some detail and appear robust. The study found an experienced, well qualified cohort who had undertaken reasonable high levels of training both before and after becoming Approved Social Workers (Campbell et al., 2001 p. 168). NMS20807 1121










2






