NMS202_01R_Ex01
1.1. Overview
This chapter provides the context for this study. It presents a brief overview of the country Ghana, its culture, governance, and the health system which plans and implements child nutrition interventions. It also outlines the feeding practices and current nutritional state of children under five years old in Ghana. The chapter closes with a statement demonstrating the disparity between child nutrition interventions by the health service and the feeding practices in a rural community and a call to explore possible explanations.
1.2. Child feeding in context

Child feeding involves those activities that result in the ingestion of food. Child feeding is the single direct activity that influences the nutritional status of the child as it guarantees nutrient intake. The nutritional status of children and the impact of this on individuals and communities is affected by feeding practices such as early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding for 5 months, the time of introducing complementary foods and the frequency and regularity of feeding (De Onis, 2006; Dewey, 2001). Supervised feeding and the attitude of carers towards child feeding also affect nutritional outcomes (Ramji, 2009). Other related activities, such as food cultivation and economic activities influence child nutritional status. Besides ensuring optimal growth and development, appropriate child feeding reduces the risk of infectious and diarrhoeal diseases and death (UNICEF, 2016a).

Nutritionists and food scientists have provided evidence on what constitutes healthy food and feeding to ensure an optimal nutritional status. However, due to different influences such as climate, economics, and culture on the cultivation, accessibility, and consumption of food across the planet, not all individuals consume food in the way that the body requires to function effectively. Consequently, as part of their strategy to support countries to maintain and promote optimal nutrition, and to prevent and treat malnutrition in the global population and in children under-five years, the World Health Organisation (WHO) and the United Nations Children and Education Fund (UNICEF) have developed recommendations for the optimal feeding of children (WHO and UNICEF, 2003). These recommendations are based on rigorous research from various countries across the world (De Onis, 2006) and include exclusive breastfeeding for the first 4 to 6 months; continuous breastfeeding with complementary feeding from 6 months onwards to at least 2 years; specifying the type of solid, semi-solid and soft food to give to children at a particular age; the minimum number of food groups to include in a child's diet and the frequency and diversity of children's meals (WHO and UNICEF, 2003). It is believed that following these practices would ensure that children achieve and maintain a satisfactory nutritional status. However, there is evidence that children worldwide are not appropriately fed. For instance, it is estimated that only 40% of the world's children under 6 months are exclusively breastfed (WHO, 2015). Children may also be introduced to complementary foods either too early or too late, and they may not always be given the right kinds of food (UNICEF, 2016a). Ghana is one of the countries where children are inadequately fed (GSS et al., 2016; MICS, 2011b). The preceding section shows the state of child feeding in Ghana.
1.3. Status of Ghanaian child feeding

Documented evidence shows that children in Ghana are not fed adequately (GDHS, 2014 & Gyampoh et al., 2014 & (MICS, 2011b). In a multi-indicator cluster survey (MICS) using questionnaires to gather health information on 7381 children under the age of five years, up to 69% of Ghanaian children were not being fed per the WHO and UNICEF feeding recommendations (MICS, 2011b). Similarly, 87% of Ghanaian children between the ages of 6-23 months were not fed the minimum acceptable diet according to the Ghana Demographic Health Survey (DGHS, 2015). Gyampoh et al., (2014) also assessed the knowledge of mothers regarding WHO and UNICEF recommended feeding practices and reported that even though 80% of mothers involved in their study had knowledge of the recommended infant and young child feeding (IYC) practices, 68% of them did not provide their children with the minimum acceptable diet. These findings suggest that children are not being fed adequately and this might be a contributory factor to the nutritional deficiency of children in Ghana. Additionally, though these findings represent a large proportion of children under-five years in Ghana, it is possible that many other children exist across the country who has not been captured in studies and who may not be feeding optimal. Due to the challenges in accessing data from difficult to reach populations, Anecdotal evidence shows that data management in Ghana is now developing, and data in some areas in the country are sometimes not captured. This could explain why undernutrition remains significantly high in rural Ghana.

1.4. Child malnutrition

1.4.1 Malnutrition defined
Malnutrition is a worldwide phenomenon, characterised by over- and under-nutrition. Wasting, underweight and stunting are the three main forms of undernutrition commonly occurring in developing countries (UNICEF, 2009). Over-nutrition, otherwise known as overweight or obesity is also gradually becoming a health concern in developing countries (UNICEF et al., 2012). The definition of malnutrition is established in the WHO (2006) growth standards constructed from anthropometric measurements, namely height, age, weight and the circumferences of different body parts such as upper arm and head (de Onis et al., 2006). In this script, the anthropometric indices are height; weight and age (see Table 1.1).
The growth standards indicate the standard deviation of the computation of a child's height, weight, and age, and the overall body mass index (BMI) (De Onis and WHO, 2006). When a child's anthropometric calculations are similar or worse than shown on the table, the child is suffering from a form of malnutrition. Wasting, underweight and stunting is forms of calorific malnutrition (Lloyd et al., 1978) resulting mainly from macronutrient (protein, carbohydrates, and fat) deficiency. However, micronutrient (vitamin and mineral) deficiencies co-exist with macronutrient deficiencies, and contribute to, and aggravate macronutrient deficiencies (Gershwin, 1985; Martorell, 1999).NMS20201 969

