NMS201_03R_Ex06

The scoping search process was conducted in January 2012 in preparation for the doctoral funding application. Zetoc alerts were set up at this point to maintain awareness of new evidence being published in the field. The scoping search was repeated at the end of 2012 to define the final search strategy. The research team discussed and agreed the search strategy in January 2013. The first systematic search was conducted in April 2013 and the final update was in January 2015. There was no restriction on start date, language or geographical location, as the scoping search had highlighted the dearth of evidence available in this topic area so it was important to capture any papers that existed. The aim was to collect all of the evidence for this topic area.

All of the search results from the final searches in January 2015 were combined and provided a yield of 14,469 papers (appendix 5). The broad search meant high specificity which consequently yielded a high number of hits. A narrow, focused search for high sensitivity would have been preferable, but when this was attempted many relevant papers were excluded. This was probably due in part to unclear titles resulting in problems with indexing within the databases. It was also impossible to exclude oral treatment and treatment in pregnancy studies in the search strategy without also excluding some topical treatment papers. The large number of hits were reviewed by title and abstract according to the review eligibility criteria, which eliminated 14,400 papers for irrelevance, such as emphasis on oral (parenteral) nutrition, treatment in pregnancy not infancy, duplication or not being empirical research (such as reviews, letters or commentaries). The full texts for 69 papers were considered and a further 12 papers were rejected (reviews/protocol n=3; letters/commentaries n=6; oral treatment n=1; no treatment n=1; not newborn n=1). Journal searches and exploration of the reference lists for the remaining 57 papers retrieved a further 28 papers. On deeper investigation of these 85 papers, 36 were excluded due to irrelevant outcomes (n=22), reviews (n=2), treatment/no treatment emphasis (n=9) or caring for a child with atopic eczema (n=3). A total of 49 papers were selected for critical appraisal and quality assessment (quantitative n=46; qualitative n=3). The literature search flow chart is illustrated in figure 2.3.
2.5 Critical appraisal methods

The appraisal tools originally chosen to use with the quantitative literature were those developed by the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (2010; appendix 6). These tools are specific to the type of study design. However, it became evident that using different tools for different study designs was quite onerous and lacked consistency. A validated quality appraisal tool which could be used across all types of study design was required. The critical appraisal tool developed by the Effective Public Health Practice Project (2013; appendix 7) was found to fulfil this requirement, which enabled a more consistent approach. After quality appraisal, a total of 48 papers were selected for inclusion in the quantitative review. The study characteristics for these included papers are illustrated in appendix 8.
For critical appraisal of the qualitative studies, the author has experience of using the quality assessment tool developed by Walsh and Downe (2006; appendix 9). This tool was chosen for use in this review as it amalgamates the most useful parts of existing validated tools. Qualitative studies were graded for quality using the grading system developed by Downe et al. (2009; appendix 10) based on the work by Lincoln and Guba (1985). After quality appraisal, a total of 2 papers were selected for inclusion in the qualitative review. A third qualitative paper was rejected due to poor methodological quality (appendix 8).[Figure 2.3 removed]

PART TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW

2.6 Findings of the literature review
After determining all of the available evidence by implementing inclusion and exclusion criteria and quality appraisal, 46 quantitative papers were reviewed in the topic areas of bathing and cleansing, baby massage, cultural influence, and topical applications. Quantitative papers were globally represented (Asia: 13; Europe: 11; USA: 10; UK: 9; UK/USA: 1; Egypt: 1; Australia: 1). Two UK qualitative studies are discussed in section 2.9.4. One study is incorporated twice within the review discussion (Ahmed et al. 2007) as the survey falls within section 2.9.3 and the RCT within section 2.9.5.3.iii. A table illustrating the key characteristics of all of the included studies is provided in appendix 8.These studies are now critically discussed in detail in this part of the chapter. 

2.9.1 Bathing and cleansing
Eight papers which considered products for bathing and cleansing term babies were included (appendix 8). Six of the papers reported the findings of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) (Lavender et al. 2013; 2012; 2011;Garcia-Bartels et al. 2012; 2009;Visscher et al. 2009). One paper (Furber et al. 2012) reported the qualitative data and questionnaire data from one of the RCT samples (Lavender et al. 2012). One study was in abstract form only (Galzote et al. 2007) so quality assessment was limited. The quality of the other seven studies was high. Settings included UK (n=4), Europe (n=2), USA (n=1), and Asia (n=1).

For some time, it has been recommended to parents that using water only for baby bathing and cleansing is best. This opinion may have arisen from the advice of one midwife (Trotter 2002), who suggested that babies had less skin problems if water alone was used in their skincare regimens. Trotter's advice was based on a small 'study' of her own four children, where the older two children had used wash products and the younger two used water alone. As the younger two did not experience any rashes, and the older two did, she concluded that the wash products were harmful and recommended water alone. This practice was replicated across the UK. Alternative research suggests that water may be harmful to baby skin as it is rapidly absorbed and can increase the space between cells disrupting skin barrier function (Nikolovski et al. 2008). Water has a high pH (approximately 7.2) and contains calcium salts which damage skin barrier. It is also a poor cleanser which results in substances which are damaging to the skin barrier being left in contact with the skin. NMS20106 975
