NMS206_01R_Ex 01
1.1. Background
Carers have been defined as people who deliver unpaid care to a family member or a friend who need support due to limitations of age, physical or learning disability or illness (Carers UK 2014). Carers of people with serious mental illnesses have a pivotal role in supporting their loved ones (Askey et al. 2009). A serious mental illness refers to a long-term mental disorder including schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorders, bipolar disorders, or major depressive disorder (Levine and Ligenza 2002, Steadman et al. 2009). Since the policy of deinstitutionalisation occurring simultaneously throughout the Western civilization five decades ago, mental health services have largely been assisted by the contribution of carers (van de Bovenkamp and Trappenburg 2010). Services traditionally administered from formal institutions were transferred into the community. The central aim of deinstitutionalisation was treating people with mental illnesses more therapeutically and reducing governmental economic burdens resulting from hospital-based treatments (Bachrach 1983), though a significant proportion of this burden was transferred to families.

1.3.1. The impact of caregiving on carers

In conjunction with the advent of deinstitutionalization, about 25%-50% of persons with mental illnesses in western countries, especially those with schizophrenia, stay with their family (Chan 2011). In the UK, it is estimated that up to 1.5 million people are caring for a relative with a mental health problem (Carers UK 2014). These carers often face additional expenses associated with caregiving, like extra care services alongside higher living costs and transport costs. Almost 30% carers, including those who care for mentally ill persons, experienced a drop of £20,000 or more a year in their household income as a result of caring (Carers UK, 2014).

There is a substantial body of international literature examining other impacts on carers, although some studies report positive aspects of caring for a relative with a mental illness such as providing pleasure to the person, maximising the potential of the person, experiencing enhanced relationship and sharing mutual love and support (Nolan et al. 1996, Lundh 1999, Rose et al. 2006). However, carers have the potential to experience significant distress associated with their caregiving roles (Kuipers 2010). Sources of tension include dealing with symptoms of mental disorder particularly negative symptoms such as a lack of motivation, emotional numbness and social isolation (Provencer and Mueser 1997, Barrowclough et al. 2003). Other sources of carer burden are their experiences in handling crises that may involve the police and coping with diagnosis uncertainty in the first episode (Glendy and Mackenzie 1998, van de Bovenkamp and Trappenburg 2010).


Carers of people with serious mental illnesses need help to cope with the above burden and related personal stress. When professional support is provided to carers, it is often delivered through family intervention (Lobban et al. 2013). The original rationale for the family intervention was based on evidence in the US and the UK in that, as a result of deinstitutionalisation policy in the countries, people with schizophrenia living with families that displayed high levels of expressed emotion (EE) tended to have higher relapse rates than those living in low EE families (Bebbington & Kuipers, 1994, Falloon 2003). Here, EE was designated to the emotional ambience within a family (Leff & Vaughn, 1985). Using the instrument of Camberwell Family Interview, a family was rated as high EE if they reached a cut-off score on scales of criticism, hostility, emotional over-involvement, or a combination of the three (Leff & Vaughn, 1985). If the cut-off was not reached, the family was rated as low EE. Finally, the above discovery in the US and UK in the 1970s prompted the development of EE-based family interventions that were aimed to reduce the level of stress within the family environment and relapse in service users (Pharoah et al. 2010).

After this period a variety of EE-based family interventions for carers of people with mental health problems, described as family intervention and family work in the literature, were developed and tested empirically (Barrowclough 2003). A review of 53 Randomised Controlled Trials (RCTs) confirmed the efficacy of interventions for families in reducing frequency of relapses, encouraging compliance with medication and improving social functioning among the service users. However, these family interventions have a number of limitations. First, carer outcomes in the trial studies have been largely neglected. Less than 10% of studies have demonstrated positive decreases in caregiver burden and/or improvement of carer coping (Pharoah et al. 2010). Although a recent review of four RCTs suggests that brief family intervention might increase the understanding of carers about mental illness, the smallnumber of studies and the small sample size (n=105) decreases the power of the report (Okpokoro et al. 2014).


Also, there is difficulty in extrapolating the above findings to Asian countries due to the different cultural background from the Western countries where these studies originated (Chakrabarti et al. 2011). For example, the concept of family interventions derived from Western ideology (rooted in the notion of EE as described earlier) may not be appropriate amongst Asian families. Studies in parts of Indonesia and Malaysia showed that the families had a high level of over-involvement towards the mentally ill member (Azhar and Varma 1996, Kurihara et al. 2000). It was suggested that the findings were influenced by the countries culture which put involvement as the norm, being derived from a strong family bond. Communal value from families in the Asian countries was stronger than the individual value as opposed to many western countries (Kurihara et al. 2000). While the findings of the studies (Azra and Varma 1996, Kurihara et al. 2000) cannot be generalised because of limited sample sizes, cultural adjustment of the interventions needs to be concerned with the application in other contexts (Bughra and McKenzie 2003).NMS20601 944

