NMS207_07ER_Ex13
Most of the studies (Ahluwalia et al. 2003; Teela et al. 2009; Mushi et al. 2010; Prata et al. 2012) indicate that participation of the community in maternal health has an impact in empowering the community in maternal health programmes. The community also has the power to run health programmes in order to provide and deliver maternal health services under the supervision of health professionals. Recruiting health workers from the local community to conduct some health programmes creates community empowerment in order to implement the programmes. This also enhances the ownership of maternal health programme, which in turn results in the programmesÕ sustainability in the community (Teela et al. 2009; Prata et al. 2012).

2.7.4.2 Reduce the Inequalities in Healthcare

Engaging the community in conducting maternal health interventions in areas where health services are limited is very important (Rifkin 1990; Rosato et al. 2008). The establishment of community-based interventions in maternal healthcare could reduce inequalities in healthcare, especially in poor and remote areas (Emond et al. 2002). The use of health workers recruited from the local community integrates maternal health services into the community (Emond et al. 2002; Ahluwalia et al. 2003; Rath et al. 2010). Community-based interventions also strengthen the health centre in the community and provide health services in remote and poor areas (Ahluwalia et al. 2003). This is in accordance with other literature on the adequacy of health services (Ahluwalia et al. 2003; Ogwang et al. 2012).

Another evaluation of a community-based intervention on maternal health was conducted by Emond et al. (2002). The study evaluated the effectiveness of a community-based intervention project that aimed to reduce maternal and infant mortality in a poor urban district of Brazil. Emond et al. (2002) indicate that there was evidence that the increase in participation in antenatal care by the women, led to the reduction of maternal death incidents in the community after the programme was implemented. Some of the maternal health interventions in the programme included maternal health education and increasing the communityÕs knowledge of the danger signs in pregnancy. Each intervention was clearly evaluated and the analysis process was provided in the study. The increase in knowledge, as well as the recruitment of health workers from the community, reduced the inequalities in healthcare in poor urban areas of Brazil (Emond et al. 2002; Rath et al. 2010).

The literature review is based on the evaluation of maternal health activities applied in the community. The ownership of community participation in maternal health would be established if a maternal health programme was conducted in the community. The study by Emond et al. (2002) was conducted directly after the programmes were implemented. Although the methods used were appropriate in evaluating the ownership of the programmes in the community, using these methods shortly after the programme is considered to be ineffective in measuring the sustainability of the programme (Rosener 1978). Further study should be carried out in order to assess, and maintain the sustainability and ownership by the community in maternal health programmes. This could be measured by assessing the role of the community in maternal health programmes.

2.8 Studies that have Used Community Participation Models in Maternal Health
Most studies into reducing maternal mortality indicate that the community plays a significant role in achieving the objectives of maternal health programmes. It is important to recognise different levels of community participation with an important health service component, in order to conduct community participation (WHO 2008). According to Laverack (2001) and Rosato et al. (2008) there are different levels of participation at which the community could engage with the activities. Participation has been used to indicate active or passive community involvement (Rosato et al. 2008). In the past, most community participation activities have consisted of communities responding to directions given by professionals to improve their health (Laverack 2001; Rosato et al. 2008). This process usually included activities in which the communities were passively involved, such as the arrangement of the place and setting of the implementation or being involved in specific interventions (e.g. campaigns and education on immunisation or maternal health) (Rifkin and Pridmore 2001). Recently, health development workers in Indonesia have begun to act as facilitators, focusing on the improvement as well as the outcomes (Rosato et al. 2008). In this approach, the facilitators support the local communities in being actively involved, and participating in both activities and decisions that affect their own health. These activities include providing the resources to focus on health problems or concentrating on active participants who use their own development capacities to address their needs (Rosato et al. 2008). This is the highest level of community participation Ð where the community has built its own capacities and capabilities in order to sustain the implemented programmes (Laverack and Wallerstein 2001). However, it is important to address some problems that may occur within this level; for example the willingness of full engagement from the community within the programme. Although the level of community participation is varied among the programmes, some maternal health programmes addressed the usefulness of involving the community for the programmeÕs effectiveness.

There are some adapting models that have been used in conducting community participation. These models were implemented based on the level of participation from the community. Some models that have been adapted in applying community participation are: an asset-based community development (ABCD) model by Allen (2007), and a community-based approach by Labonte and Laverack (2001). The ABCD model is an approach to community-based development based on the resource principles. It is based on the premise of appreciating and mobilising individual and community talents, skills and assets rather than focusing on problems and needs (Allen 2007). The community drives the development rather than an external agency, placing a priority on collaborative efforts for the development, that make best use of its own resource (Laverack 2001). ABCDÕs focus is community development, which has been used in planning, skill development, need assessment, as well as monitoring and evaluation (Allen 2007). It provides a flexible method that can be adapted to different forms of community development with different geographical contexts (Allen 2007). Since the community has the self-capacity in developing this model including its monitoring and evaluation, there are some critiques on its monitoring and evaluation process. Moreover, this model might be less suitable in less developed community settings that need increased levels of effort and education from the community. NMS20713 1060

