NMS208_3R_Ex06
Instrumental aspects
The literature on approved mental health practice emphasises the importance of its instrumental aspects. These are categorised for this review into two elements, skills and knowledge.
Skills: coordination
As a way of informing the process of the reform of the mental health legislation, research was commissioned by the Department of Health to explore the issue of how Approved Social Work is performed in real-life situations. The resulting study was among the first to take a solely qualitative approach; the method used by the researchers was to observe Approved Social Workers as they undertook assessments (Quirk et al., 2000). Participants were located in two London boroughs and fieldwork was conducted in five separate teams: two hospital-based social work teams, two community mental health teams and an emergency duty team that operated outside usual office hours.
Twenty assessments were observed taking place over a six-month period. Additionally, interviews were held with participants. The process of data collection and authentication, including member checking of field notes and write up, is described in what is a rigorous study that also demonstrates due ethical regard.

This study found that Approved Social Work requires multiple skills, attributes which the authors suggest would not easily be adopted by other professionals. In particular, safeguarding the social work function was recommended although there was no discussion or definition of the meaning of social work by the authors. It was also found that a social work function is valued by practitioners. Whilst, at first glance the recommendation and the finding seems to support sole retention of this function, the study does not conclude that accomplishing Approved Social Work is unique to the social work profession. What is suggested is that any professional responsible for co- ordinating assessments will require training for the demanding and multi-dimensional role and these are skills that might be difficult to replicate. Moreover, that the social work function means the consideration of social issues (Quirk et al., 2000 p. 9). The useof social work to describe this element is therefore misleading since it does not necessarily mean the social work profession.

Nonetheless, the identification of the multiple roles of Approved Social Work which the study also found is of particular relevance to this literature review, most of which can be categorised as coordination. It was concluded that if assessments were to be organised successfully, approved mental health act practitioners would need ongoing contingency management skills. Meanwhile other abilities such as task-juggling and improvisation, cajoling and persuasion were also seen to be typically required, skills that one of the respondents reported as being able to successfully stage-manage (Quirk et al., 2000 p..45).

The need to be able to coordinate assessments is also found in other studies but with no indication that such a skill is best suited to any profession. In one such instance semi- structured interviews were undertaken with a sample of the various professional disciplines involved in Approved Social Work in the community: eight doctors; five Approved Social Workers; five community psychiatric nurses; five ambulance personnel and eight police officers, all based in one National Health Service Trust in London (Bowers et al., 2003). This particular study sought to provide insight into how the assessment and detention process works and, whilst not stated explicitly, does so from the viewpoint of various disciplines. However, it is not always possible to understand where there might be a difference due to professional background. For example, one respondent is reported as saying that if one plate drops off then, it can affect the outcome of the assessment (Bowers et al., 2003 p. 963) but, as this quote is not attributed, it is not possible to know if the impact was the experience of one, or all backgrounds. It is reported that all groups of professionals spoke about the difficulties of organising a compulsory admission, in particular getting the requested personnel to
the right place at the right time and in so doing this reflects the Quirk et al. (2000) study. There is no discussion or indication however as to whether professional background matters.

Later research sought to examine routine practice of Approved Social Workers in one health and social care trust in Northern Ireland (Davidson and Campbell, 2010). Carried out in two phases, this particular study examined data collected from the official forms used to log activity during the assessment period along with a self-completed questionnaire by a sample of practitioners. Of relevance to this literature review, participants were asked to comment on their experience of working with other professionals. It was found that Approved Social Workers, but not all professional groups involved in the assessment, reported difficulties around coordination (Davidson and Campbell, 2010 p. 1622). This study is arguably limited in that it took place in one location only. Also, for the purposes here, it was undertaken in a legislative context which is not considering opening up approved mental health practice to non-medical professionals. Nonetheless, it provides further evidence that coordination is a key aspect of approved mental health practice. NMS20806 836

