NMS204_04R_Ex07
Another area of concern in the use of anti-emetics is the risk of drug-drug interactions. Interactions between anti-emetics and antineoplastic agents have not yet been adequately investigated (Huertas-Fern‡ndez et al., 2010). Moreover, treatment with one or more antineoplastic agents implies concomitant treatment with other supportive care medications such as analgesics, neuroleptic medications, antidepressants, anticoagulants, laxatives, corticosteroids, and antibiotics. In addition, considering the median age of cancer patients, which is 60- plus, the risk of other chronic disorders such as cardiovascular, gastrointestinal and rheumatologic diseases increase and call for additional medication. These patients are also at high risk of age-related problems which may lead to a decrease in their hepatic and renal function, and the excretion of many medications. Therefore, poly-pharmacy in the older patient raises the risk of drug interactions, and also increases the potential for toxicity (Huertas-Fern‡ndez et al., 2010; Blower et al., 2005). In addition, anti-emetics are ineffective in some patients, without any known reason (Herrstedt & Dombernowsky, 2007).

Therefore, not only is the development of new anti-emetics with other mechanisms of action awaited with interest, but non-pharmacological approaches are also being considered to develop the activity and reduce the adverse effects of chemotherapy. The next section will focus on the use of systematic reviews to detail the results of non-pharmacological interventions (in addition to anti-emetics) which have previously been trialled for the prevention and treatment of CINV.

2.10 Non-pharmacological interventions for the control and management of CINV

Although pharmacological treatment is common for CINV, this modality is not effective for all patients in all circumstances. This unsatisfactory outcome has led some patients and health-care professionals to look for other solutions. A wide range of non-pharmacological interventions, in addition to anti-emetics, have been examined to ameliorate CINV. These include psychosocial interventions, and several types of CAM.

2.10.1 Complementary and alternative therapies

The National Centre for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM) defines CAM as "a group of diverse medical and healthcare systems, practices, and products that are not presently considered to be part of conventional medicine" (NCCAM, 2012). The National Cancer Institute at the National Institute of Health (NCINIH) defines CAM as any medical system, practice, or product that is not considered as standard care. Standard medical care is defined as care that is based on scientific evidence. For instance, standard care for cancer includes chemotherapy, radiation, biological therapy, and surgery (NCINIH, 2012). According to the NCINIH, complementary medicine is used along with standard medical treatments. For instance, acupuncture can ameliorate the side effects of cancer treatments such as nausea-related chemotherapy. However, alternative medicine is used in place of standard medical treatments. For example, a special diet to treat cancer as a replacement for standard treatments which a cancer specialist (oncologist) proposes. Integrative medicine is an approach to care that involves the patient's mind, body, and spirit. It combines standard medicine with CAM practices. For instance, some cancer patients learn to use relaxation as a way to reduce stress during chemotherapy (NCINIH, 2012).
CAM practices are classified by NCCAM into three broad categories:

* Natural products (biologically based practices): Uses natural products. This includes dietary supplements and herbal products. Vitamins, herbs/herbal medicines (also known as botanicals), minerals, foods and special diets all fall into this category.
* Mind and body medicines: These are based on interactions among the brain, mind, body, and behaviour, with the intent to use the mind to affect physical functioning and promote health. Some examples are: music therapy, guided imagery, hypnotherapy, acupuncture, and progressive muscle relaxation.
* Manipulative and body-based practices: These are mainly based on the structures and systems of the body, including the bones and joints, soft tissues, and circulatory and lymphatic systems working with one or more parts of the body. For example: massage therapy (manipulation of tissues), chiropractic methods (manipulation of the joints and skeletal system), and reflexology (using pressure points in the hands or feet to affect other parts of the body).
NCINIH suggests one more category as:

* Alternative medical systems: These are healing systems and beliefs that have evolved over time in different cultures and parts of the world. For example: acupuncture, traditional Chinese medicine, homeopathy, and naturopathic medicine.

It is notable that some types of CAM, such as biologically based practices, which are also called pharmacologic and biologic treatments, use certain prescription drugs in a way not originally intended. This includes using vaccines, hormones, natural products (botanicals), herbs and other biologic treatments on people with cancer (NCINIH, 2012).
This study focuses only on non-pharmacological types of CAM (mind and body medicine), as music (or audio programme) interventions are categorised to mind and body medicine.
In addition, the boundaries within CAM and between CAM domains are blurred and constantly shifting (Smith et al., 2011); therefore, these categories are not formally defined, and some practices may fit into more than one category (NCCAM, 2012). For instance, acupuncture can fall into three categories: mind- body medicine, manipulative and body-based practices, and alternative medical systems
2.10.2 Use of CAM by cancer patients

There has been a growing body of literature that demonstrates an increasing tendency in the cancer population to turn to use CAM alongside standard cancer treatments (Schiff & Ben-Arye, 2011; Harrington et al., 2012). It has been suggested that most consumers commence CAM during standard cancer treatments, and therefore tend to be complementary rather than alternative users (Beatty et al., 2012).

While it is known that cancer patients report using more CAM than the general population, the prevalence estimates for CAM use vary from 7% to 91% in  different studies (Collinge et al., 2012; Beatty et al., 2012; Ernst & Cassileth, 1998). Visser et al. (2012) indicated that cancer patients are confronted with a number of emotional, social, and spiritual problems (Visser et al., 2011); therefore, they are more likely to turn to the use of CAM to raise their QoL. Moreover, it has been documented that the main reasons for CAM use include the belief that using CAM may boost the immune system, relieve disease symptoms and side effects of cancer treatment, redress emotional imbalances resulting from diagnosis and treatment, and/or enhance the efficacy of standard cancer treatments (Harrington et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2011). NMS20407 1023

