NMS202_05R_Ex09
2.12.2 Feeding the under-five Child
After 6 months, a child requires a variety of food, prepared to different consistencies and fed at specific frequencies based on a child's age (Dewey, 2003; UNICEF, 2012). The subsequent sections present findings on the content of children.
2.1.12.2. Child dietary sources
The review showed a range of child feeding practices across the African continent, with similarities and differences in diets. However, the common dietary sources of a child's diet reported in studies in West Africa (Pelto and Armar-Klemesu, 2011; Nti and Lartey, 2007b; Hampshire et al., 2009; Awumbila, 2003) (Gibson et al., 2009; Baye et al., 2012) in East Africa, (Paul et al., 2011) and (Hotz and Gibson, 2001) in southern Africa were cereals and legumes. The study reports  suggested that for children, carbohydrate based diets were preferred though other food sources were reportedly included in child diets. However, these foods such as vegetables, fruit, and food from animal sources were not routinely parts of children's diets. For instance, in a mixed study of mothers, community leaders, health practitioners and elderly men and women that was  undertaken to determine intra-household gender relationships, access and control of household productive assets and child nutritional status, of the under-fives in Tanzania, Mwaseba and Kaarhus (2015), found that, like adults, a child might only eat indigenous green vegetables occasionally. Similarly, milk and other dairy products were found to be included in children's diets, only in areas where cow's milk was one of the staple foods (Mwaseba and Kaarhus, 2015; Wyatt et al., 2015; Hampshire et al., 2009; Kruger and Gericke, 2003) and not areas without milk. Similarly, in (Paul et al., 2011) study in a coastal area where fish was abundant, children were not given fish.

These findings suggest that the diets of many children across Africa may contain a limited variety of food sources against the recommendations of (Dewey et al., 2006), that children's daily diets should contain food from at least four of the seven food sources to ensure that they obtained all their daily nutrient requirements. The seven food groups are grains, roots, and tubers; legumes and nuts; dairy products (milk, Yogurt, cheese); flesh foods (meat, fish, poultry and liver/ organ meats); eggs; vitamin-A rich fruit and vegetables) and other fruit and vegetables (WHO, 2008). The limited variety of nutrients in children's diets was clearly demonstrated in the cross sectional survey conducted in Malawi to estimate the quality and quantity of complementary diet and feeding practices, as well as the dietary modifiers of iron and zinc in children's diets (Hotz and Gibson, 2001). Beyond counting the number of food sources in children's diet, Hotz and Gibson (2001) analysed the bioavailability of foods that were reported in the 24-hour dietary recall. They found that the bioavailability of most nutrients from foods that were reportedly given to children were inadequate. For instance, in the age group 9 to11 months, Hotz and Gibson (2001) reported that the bioavailability of niacin, calcium, zinc and iron was inadequate for the estimated needs. Similarly, their report suggested that with the exception of protein, the bioavailability of energy  and other nutrients in the complementary diet of children between 6 and 8 months was less than 80% of the estimated need (Hotz and Gibson, 2001). Whilst these findings provided more insight into the nutritive content of children's diet, the authors included limited information on aspects of the methods such as data analysis and sampling limiting the potential for replicating the study effectively.


2.12.3  Consistency of child diets
Diet consistency as reported in the review ranged from highly diluted porridges and cereal fluids to solid, mushy and family foods. These consistencies as reported did not match age-related diet consistency advice. In Niger (West Africa), a light family meal made from millet flour and water was reportedly fed to children throughout the day (Hampshire et al., 2009). In this study, the cultural context of childcare practices and child nutritional vulnerability was examined by interviewing mothers, siblings, chiefs and grandmothers (Hampshire et al., 2009). Similarly, Leshabari et al. (2006) and (Awumbila, 2003) reported that porridge and cow's milk were diluted with water and fed to children. Awumbila (2003), indicated that a younger child's porridge was
initially light and was gradually thickened as the child grew, although specific ages were not reported. In another study exploring rural feeding, weaning practices and the knowledge and attitudes of mothers and caregivers of children under-3 years of age, Kruger, and Gericke (2003) learned that children in South Africa were given highly diluted porridge. The consistencies reported by (Awumbila, 2003; Hampshire et al., 2009; Kruger and Gericke, 2003; Leshabari et al., 2006) ranged from light to soft.

These reports also showed that some children ate thick family foods, whose textures and consistency appeared to vary. In a longitudinal study in Tanzania examining the cause of the variation in weaning and complementary child feeding patterns, using focus group discussions and the interviewing of mothers, Sellen (2001b) found that children were usually given stiff maize porridge. Sellen (2001a) examined the causes of variation in weaning patterns and the extent to which infant centred maternal or household cues played a part in weaning decision making in Tanzania. The study employed semi- structured interviews, focus group discussions and 24-hour recall in households and amongst mothers with children under three years of age. Like the previous authors, Sellen (2001a) did not indicate whether food consistencies differed for the different age categories. Although, Pelto and Armar-Klemesu (2011) and Hotz and Gibson (2001) mentioned the consistencies of diets for specific age groups detail was limited. NMS20209 927

