NMS208_6R_Ex12
In psychoanalytic terms, containment is the process whereby the distress of others' is managed without seeming to affect the person encountering the distress. Gregor cites Bion who used this psychoanalytical concept to explain how a mother processes difficult feelings for her child, returning them to the child in a more digestible format (Gregor, 2010 p. 432). The study concluded that containment is a required skill since an Approved Social Worker unconsciously processes a wealth of powerful emotions and feelings for service users, their families and sometimes other professionals involved (Gregor, 2010 p.432). Moreover, it was claimed that, if functioning well, the Approved Social Worker returned these feelings in a more manageable format for the person being assessed. But, if not functioning well, the practitioner experienced the distress and anxiety of the situation and did so as if it were their own. Unfortunately, these claims are not backed up by direct evidence nor, for the sake of this review, is it possible to tell if such skill is peculiar to any one profession. Gregor did comment that containment is likely to be required of the new professional groups that had become eligible to undertake approved mental health practice.

This same study also aligns containment with the sociological concept of emotional labour, the later concept developed by Hochschild (cited in Gregor, 2010 p.432) and refers to the need for a worker, albeit not explicitly, to demonstrate a calm and unfluctuating demeanour even when confronted by unwarranted provocation. Gregor (2010) believes that this concept can be applied to the respondents in her study as way of explaining how practitioners develop strategies to manage the associated emotional challenges. But, this claim is not fully substantiated when explored in detail. For instance, Hoschschild noted three ways for workers to deal with the difficult aspects of work; the first to wholeheartedly identify with the assigned role, the second to act a role and distance oneself from it and the third to accept the division between the real self and the on-stage self (Hochschild, 1983). Each strategy, according to Hochschild, bears risk; the first of emotional burnout, the second of being insincere and also of being unfulfilled, and the third of estrangement and cynicism.

Gregor (2010) does not analyse her findings according to these three outcomes. She states, that far from distancing their real self, a small number of the respondents openly and consciously engaged whilst acknowledging the inherent power. This might suggest the first of Hochschild's strategies is adopted but, this is not acknowledged by Gregor, nor is it then analysed in terms of the risk associated with this particular outcome. The concepts of containment and emotional labour do have some appeal for this thesis but in this particular study are not really evidenced by Gregor. Nonetheless, the direct quotes from respondents do provide insight. In addition, Gregor wonders why Approved Social Workers do not cognitively reconstruct their role and view emotional labour as a skilled aspect (Gregor, 2010 p. 438), a thought which is a more positive one. Whether such a skill specific to a particular profession needs further exploration in this thesis.

Dirty work is another sociological concept that has been explored in relation to emergency psychiatric work in general, and approved mental health practice in particular. Its progenitor, Hughes (1971), coined the concept of dirty work when examining the moral division of labour in occupations which is reported to have two aspects. The first concerns the behaviour of those with supposed higher status seeking to specialise in the most desirable elements of work whilst transferring the least desirable to, usually, inferior others. However, the relocation is not always possible, and in such situation workers justify having to do that which is least desired and sometimes also exaggerate its importance. The extent to which they justify varies. An earlier study in America (Emerson and Pollner, 1976) which, in terms of the date, falls outside the scope of this review is an important foundation for later studies. This study reported
mental health workers dealing with the so-called dirty work of compulsory admission. The act of compulsion was viewed as doing to and signalled a failure of therapeutic intervention or doing for. Nonetheless, in the study doing compulsory admission was legitimised and as such, and paradoxically, was sustained. Later studies in England that do fall in scope also explored the concept of dirty work in relation to mental health work.

The first of these found that most workers in the community mental health team studied categorised work that was not therapeutic as dirty and in turn its author argued that participants were, in dirty work terms, legitimising the transfer of it to others (Brown 1989). This assertion, in effect, applies the first aspect of dirty work. The remaining studies apply the second and are of particular relevance since they explore the concept in relation to Approved Social Workers (Quirk, 2008) and Approved Mental Health Professionals (Morriss, 2014, 2015). In a doctoral thesis, using data from the original Department of Health study (Quirk et al., 2001), Quirk (2008), viewed the anomalous nature of the multiple roles of the Approved Social Worker as dirty work because of the moral difficulties experienced during assessments. In other words, Approved Social Work is work that someone has to do and is thereby legitimised. In an interesting inclusion, participants, during the member validation of the data and its write up, had questioned what others might think of them if the work was termed as dirty work. This was a concern which is countered by the author when he extols the approach to Approved Social Work that he had observed, describing this as serious and solemn. Moreover, he suggested that it would be more shocking if the work was simply undertaken in a matter-of-fact way with no mention of its morally dubious dimension. Last, he concluded that Approved Social Work can have a therapeutic aspect and does not just involve a compulsory admission. He is, in effect, legitimising Approved Social Work for the participants.
NMS20812 1003

