NMS205_03R_Ex05
3.2 d/Deaf people and their language
Typically infants begin to acquire their native language before the age of two, and this acquisition is rapidly developed during the same two or three years in every culture (Konner, 1991). In order to enable a deaf child to acquire language, to reach their potential and to achieve the optimum outcome, they need exposure to a language-rich environment both in terms of quality and quantity of language (Calderon & Greenberg, 2000). However, it is well documented that many d/Deaf children (more so for those of hearing parents) experience language delay and in some cases language deficit (Mohay, 2000; Yoshinaga-Itano, 2003). In the case of sign language, Anderson and Reilly (2002) stated that many deaf children who do not have deaf parents are over three years of age before they learn any sign language. It has also been reported that some parents feel that they do not receive sufficient information in relation to the communication options for their deaf child (Young et al., 2006). A delay in language places other developmental skills at risk of delay also - for example it may affect cognitive and academic outcomes (Luft, 2011). Furthermore, the literacy skills in d/Deaf children tends to be delayed and/or the child fails to develop to their optimum potential (Mayer, 2007). For those children who use sign language, literacy skills might be affected by poor access to education, inadequate signing skills of some teachers and/or lack of provision in the educational setting. Marschark, Lang, and Albertini (2002) emphasise the importance of communication and state that "effective communication is an important ingredient of healthy psychological functioning" (2002, p. 61). Without effective communication, it is more challenging to achieve skills such as interaction with others, the ability to navigate through society and develop a sense of self.
BSL has no written form. Some Deaf people are bilingual i.e. they understand written and/or spoken English and sign language. The unique aspect of bilingualism in Deaf people, (compared to most hearing bilinguals), is the difference in the modality between the two languages (visual and written formats). Furthermore, one must bear in mind that being bilingual does not necessarily mean that the level of the fluency in sign language and English are balanced, as someone may be more fluent in BSL (as it is used as a first language) than English (which is used as a second language). For some Deaf people the use of English as a second language may only be in its written form (Grosjean, 1996), as not all Deaf people have intelligible speech to the untrained ear. Whilst information and news is indeed available, in written format, in the media and on the internet those d/Deaf people with poor literacy skills may find this difficult to access. In summary, for d/Deaf people with poor literacy skills, there are significant barriers in accessing information, for example, in reading health related information which may help to maintain their mental well-being.

3.2.1 Deaf people and British Sign Language
Deaf people in the UK, who identify themselves as Deaf and are part of a Deaf community, are likely to use BSL in order to communicate. British Sign Language is a language in its own right. It is a visual-spatial language with its own grammatical structure (Sutton-Spence & Woll, 1999). Findings from the GP patient survey revealed that there are at least 100,000 Deaf BSL users in England (BSMHD, 2010). It was not until 2003 however that the UK Government accepted BSL as an official indigenous language (Smith, 2003). Despite this recognition, BSL still has no legal protection (i.e. there is no BSL Bill or BSL Act that has been adopted in law by the UK Government). As a consequence, there is currently no legal obligation for service providers to ensure that Deaf people have the right to full linguistic access to education, employment and health services in the UK. If BSL had legal protection, then one would expect that accessibility would be improved by, for example, making health related information available in BSL, an increased awareness of BSL, and a growth in the number of BSL/English interpreters. Communication barriers, whether experienced in sign language or spoken/written language, can be a frustrating experience. The ability to overcome the difficulties associated with experiencing communication barriers on a daily basis depends on an individual person's strategies of dealing with them and their outlook on life (Griggs, 1998).

In order to understand the limited legal rights of Deaf people in the UK it is essential to understand Deaf people's struggle over hundreds of years to obtain equal status and recognition and in particular the discrimination against Deaf people who use sign languages. The Milan Congress (2nd International Congress on Education of the Deaf (ICED)) held in 1880 resulted in educational policies in the UK that banned the use of sign language in the majority of educational settings for deaf children. It was claimed that d/Deaf children should be taught to speak and hear in order to 'fit in' with society and become 'normal'. This was a result of the medical model influencing the perspective of the delegates who attended the Congress. Furthermore, there was an assumption at the time that the use of sign language would restrict the development of spoken language. Although it is acknowledged that sign language has been used in some educational settings since then (dependent on the particular school or local education policy), it is only recently that there has been an acknowledgement that the ban on sign language in schools imposed by 1880 Milan Congress was unacceptable. At the 2010 21st ICED, in Vancouver, Canada, the detrimental effects of the Milan 1880 Congress were acknowledged and this resulted in the rejection of all the resolutions that had been made in relation to the exclusion of sign language in educational settings for d/Deaf people (Rogers, 2010). NMS20505 970


