NMS208_6R_Ex11
The one study on the social perspective that does base it findings on empirical evidence is that of a four-year research project exploring the organisation and practice of approved mental health practice role in Scotland using respondents' description of their own perspectives of the role (Myers, 1999). The study included in-depth interviews with 46 Mental Health Officers in a number of regions and service settings in Scotland. Respondents were said to perceive the skills, sensibilities and values they brought to bear on the assessment process were those of social work and that these same workers brought a specifically social perspective (Myers, 1999 p.109). This finding was, of course, the perception of the worker and does not seem to have been asked in the context of whether any other professional could bring such a perspective. On the other hand, some respondents were also reported as adopting different identities. This is symbolised by a hat metaphor; the wearing of a social work hat was said to imply one set of procedures, approaches and attitudes, and another hat those of the Mental Health Officer (Myers, 1999 p. 108). Myers discusses this finding in terms of what she calls the continuities and discontinuities between the two roles and describes two models. In one, the role of the Mental Health Officer is perceived as discrete and separate from social work. In the other it is absorbed into a broader social work role. For the purposes of the review here it might be possible to suggest that any professional could then, to extend the metaphor, take off their professional hat.

Of primary importance to approved mental health practice is the principle of independence. When combined with instrumental aspects, this has become known as the social perspective; the fundamental moral framework. For some commentators this perspective is said to be the domain of social work (Fisher et al., 1984, Sheppard, 1990).

But this is a viewpoint only and a contested one. Some suggest that approved mental health practice is a discrete role and by implication could be undertaken irrespective of professional background (Myers, 1990). Others contend that what needs to be dealt with during the accomplishment of the role requires a social work background (Walton, 2000, Hatfield, 2008). Whereas lack of non-medical alternatives mean that independence is illusory, so too in the literature there is an increased realisation that this is also the case in relation to the social perspective (Gregor, 2010). However, where instrumental aspects have their basis in a range of empirical evidence that which refers to the moral framework is less robust and especially so in relation to the question about what impact professional background has on approved mental health practice. There is an acknowledged lack of uptake by other professions of the Approved Mental Health Professional role (General Social Care Council, 2012) which may be due to structural issues rather than the impact professional background might have, but this is not discussed in the current research. The impact of professional background is the first focus of this thesis. The second is how approved mental health is experienced by practitioners. This next section of the review will now examine the literature in relation to this second focus.
The experience of approved mental health practice

Data from several studies explores the experience of approved mental health practice. The focus of this section of the review is that data which refers to the practitioner. What follows is a discussion of the experience in terms of the concepts of containment, emotional labour and dirty work followed by a consideration of the literature relating to what is deemed the emotional and physical risks. In contrast, the data also indicates positive aspects in particular that approved mental health practice is interesting and dynamic work which gives rise to competing demands and also requires effective management of the therapeutic relationship following assessment.
Containment, emotional labour and dirty work

In one small scale, qualitative study the views and perceptions of Approved Social Workers about their statutory roles and tasks were explored (Gregor, 2010). This study interviewed participants immediately prior to the transition from Approved Social Worker to Approved Mental Health Professional in order to capture the point of change and try and understand the complexities of the role and how participants related emotionally to it (Gregor, 2010 p.428). One non-practising and 24 practising approved mental health practitioners were interviewed by a sole researcher based on questions generated by a focus group of Approved Social Workers. A sample of the questions asked were listed and the research was reported within these categories. The areas of most relevance here are: motivation to undertake the role; continuing motivation; most important aspects of the role and most difficult aspects of the role.
No mention is made of ethical permission for this study which is carried out with fellow professionals, some known to the researcher, although it is acknowledged that the respondents may well have been uncomfortable in expressing their feelings because of this relationship. Moreover, the analysis is reported to have been done in accordance with the principles of Grounded Theory. The researcher states that she identified themes in the transcripts, later organised into sub-themes and reviewed by drawing on psychoanalytic concepts. This suggests that 'pure' Grounded Theory was not utilised, rather that the evidence was analysed to fit pre-existing psychoanalytical concepts. For example, Gregor focuses in particular upon containment and emotional labour or, what she refers to as the unconscious aspects of Approved Social Work.
NMS20811 911

