NMS201_01R_Ex01
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION
1.1 Introduction
This chapter will be presented in two parts. Part One will provide an introduction to the context of the study, including a description of the setting and an outline of the thesis. Part Two will present an overview of the background to the study including the physiology of the skin, current clinical practice and the rationale for the doctoral study.
CHAPTER ONE PART ONE
1.2 Context overview
1.2.1 Overview of the topic
Topical skincare products are those which are applied on to the surface of the skin. Topical oils have been used in skincare regimens for centuries, and can be documented as early as 2760BC (Mitzel-Wilkinson 2000). The use of topical oils has become a traditional recommendation by midwives and other maternity service health professionals for the prevention or treatment of baby dry skin or for baby massage (Cooke et al. 2011;Walker et al. 2005). This is a global phenomenon; mustard and coconut oils are popular in Eastern cultures (Mullany et al. 2005;Sankaranarayanan et al. 2005;Darmstadt and Saha 2002) compared to olive and sunflower oils in the UK (Cooke et al. 2011; appendix 1). The differential effects of using topical oils for the prevention or treatment of baby dry skin on skin barrier function may contribute to the development of childhood atopic eczema (Danby et al. 2013). Certain compositions of oil have been shown to affect the stratum corneum. Olive oil, with a high ratio of oleic acid to linoleic acid, disrupts the lipid structure of the skin barrier (Danby et al. 2013;Jiang and Zhou 2003;Darmstadt et al. 2002). Sunflower oil, with a high ratio of linoleic acid to oleic acid, has been shown to benefit the skin barrier (Danby et al. 2013;Darmstadt et al. 2002). A damaged skin barrier is a characteristic of atopic eczema. Prevalence of atopic eczema has increased from 5% of children aged 2 to 15 years in the 1940s (Taylor et al. 1984) to approaching 30% more recently (Gupta et al. 2004). It is not possible to attribute this increase to genetic changes in the skin. Conversely, environmental factors have changed over the years, including the increased availability and use of some inappropriately formulated baby skincare products. Furthermore, there is a common but unfounded belief that what is 'natural' is also 'safe' (Bedwell and Lavender 2012), resulting in the widespread use of untested vegetable oils on newborn skin. It is unestablished whether there is a link between the use of topical products on newborn skin and the development of atopic eczema, but the potential for this link exists. The question of whether there is such a link led to the hypothesis for this doctoral study: that the regular application of topical sunflower oil, when compared to no oil or topical olive oil, had an effect on the skin barrier function of newborn term babies.

A pilot, assessor-blinded, randomised controlled trial was designed and implemented to assess the feasibility of conducting a definitive trial to investigate the impact of topical oil use on the skin of newborn term babies. Aims were to provide proof of concept that topical oils have some effect on skin barrier function, and to generate data to inform the optimal definitive trial design.
1.2.2 Setting
During 2013, England had 698,512 live births (Office of National Statistics 2014b). The North West of England has the highest rate of births after London and the South East (table 1.1). Greater Manchester has the largest number of births for the North West (Office of National Statistics 2014b). Most births take place in the hospital setting. The rate for home births remains low at 2.3% nationally, but even lower in the North West at 2.0% (Office of National Statistics 2014a).[Table 1.1 removed]

This doctoral study was conducted in a large regional teaching hospital in North West England. St. Mary's Hospital in Manchester has approximately 8000 births per annum (September 2013 to August 2014), of which approximately 7250 babies are born full term (Central Manchester NHS Foundation Trust 2014).

This setting was chosen because Greater Manchester is an ethnically diverse county with a high number of full term births. In the study recruitment year (2013/2014), of mothers who gave birth at St. Mary's: 48% were White British, 15% were of Asian origin, 10% were of Afro-Caribbean origin and 1% were of oriental origin (Central Manchester NHS Foundation Trust 2014). Others were of mixed origin or had not disclosed their ethnic group.

As this was a pilot study, a single centre setting was chosen. If the pilot were to proceed to a definitive trial, a multi-centre design would allow for recruitment of a much larger sample size, and findings which are more precise and more generalisable to a larger population (Gardner and Altman 2000).
1.3 Outline of the Thesis
The thesis comprises eight chapters, of which an outline of each is presented here.[Outline removed}

CHAPTER ONE PART TWO
1.4 Baby skin

1.4.1 Physiology of the skin
Human skin is the largest organ of the body. It separates and protects the internal organs from the environment, acting as a barrier to infiltration from external irritants, allergens and pathogens, and as protection from excessive water loss (Lewis-Jones 2012). The skin has three layers: the epidermis, the dermis and the hypodermis (subcutaneous layer) which are illustrated in figure 1.1. [Figure 1.1 removed]

The epidermis (figure 1.2) is made up of layers of keratinocytes closely packed together. These keratinocytes are at different stages of differentiation. The process of differentiation involves the formation of new keratinocytes in the stratum basale, which travel upwards through the skin layers until they become corneocytes as they pass through the stratum compactum (Candi et al. 2005). Once the corneocytes reach the surface of the skin, they are shed in a normal physiological process termed desquamation (figures 1.1 and 1.2). [Figure 1.2 removed]
1.4.2 Skin barrier function
Skin barrier function can be affected by genetic and environmental factors. One method of understanding how the skin barrier works is by using a 'brick wall' analogy (Cork et al. 2009; figure 1.3). Panel A in figure 1.3 represents a well-functioning skin barrier, where water loss is minimised and the skin barrier prevents penetration of external agents. The 'bricks' represent the corneocytes. They are held together by 'iron rods' which represent the corneodesmosomal junctions (supporting structure of the stratum corneum), and surrounded by mortar, which represents the lipid lamellae. [Figure 1.3 removed]

The 'rusting' or breakdown of the iron rods at the outermost layer allows the normal process of desquamation to occur, where corneocytes are shed naturally from the skin. However, in panel B, breakdown of the skin is represented by a broken wall with excessive crumbling mortar, illustrating the disorder or increased fluidity of the lipid lamellae. This damage enables penetration by external bacteria, irritants and allergens, and loss of water from the epidermis (trans-epidermal water loss [TEWL]).NMS20101 1020

