NMS207_04R_Ex12
The need for access to maternity care has been recognised in the literature as a problem (Shiffman 2003; Azad et al. 2010). This limited access made some mothers in rural areas unwilling to attend antenatal and postnatal care services (Lee et al. 2009; Titaley et al. 2010). However, some of the key points, such as preventive intervention on maternal health, are more likely to be implemented in communities where maternal health services are limited (Kidney et al. 2009). The review study by Kidney et al. (2009) suggests that community level intervention in maternal and perinatal healthcare could bring about a reduction in maternal and neonatal mortality. Providing community education andinterventions in maternal health in their region may assist and improve the maternal health situation in the community. Early detection of danger signs in pregnancy may allow the community to help mothers to reach health services when obstetric complications occur (Kidney et al. 2009; Titaley et al. 2010; Ogwang 2012). Most of these studies also note that providing better health services in the community for safer motherhood, is usually implemented within maternal health programmes. The role of the community is very important in order to provide minor assistance and to facilitate people's access to health service providers (Lee et al. 2009; Ogwang 2012).
2.7.3.1  Access Based on Professionals' Assistance
It is important for the women to have professional health assistance during their pregnancy and childbirth (Ronsmans et al. 2009; Lassi et al. 2010). A study by Ronsmans et al. (2009) indicates the importance of giving birth with assistance from the health professionals. The study found that where women give birth without access to health professionals, has contributed to the higher number of maternal mortality cases (Ronsmans et al. 2009). The involvement of health professionals in providing maternity care and assisting the birth, could help to reduce maternal mortality especially in the community (Makowiecka et al. 2008; Ronsmans et al. 2009). However, not all rural areas, especially in the developing countries are well served by the midwives. This is due to the lack of availability of midwives, and to the fact that they are not well distributed across the area (Ronsmans et al. 2009).

The involvement of health professionals during pregnancy and childbirth is very important in order to promote safer motherhood. The provision of health professionals in rural areas would help to reduce maternal mortality in the community. The study conducted by Makowiecka et al. (2008) about the midwife provision in two districts in Indonesia, indicated that there was still limited distribution of midwives in Indonesia. Some areas have less than others, especially in remote regions. By using a case-control study approach, Makowiecka et al. (2008) provides a more comprehensive understanding of the contribution factors to particular incidents. Some village midwives in rural areas of Indonesia prefer to live in urban areas, meaning that some rural areas are not well served with health professionals in maternal healthcare services (Makowiecka et al. 2008). The study suggests in order to solve this problem would require willingness from the decision-makers to take responsibility forproviding maternal health professionals in the community (Makowiecka et al. 2008).

In addition to the literature on professional assistance, other research studies also need to be placed within wider literature on the relationship between the women and health professionals; and how it affects the women during pregnancy and childbirth. Furthermore, Lassi et al. (2010) and Ogwang et al. (2012) suggest the link between community health workers (CHWs) and health professionals in rural communities, due to the absence of the health professionals in the community. This could at least help the women to have basic antenatal care and provide adequate maternal health service in the community.

2.7.4 The Ownership
Six studies were found related to the involvement of the community in contributing ownership of the maternal health programme (Emond et al. 2002; Ahluwalia et al. 2003; Teela et al. 2009; Mushi et al. 2010; Rath et al. 2010; Prata et al. 2012). Four of these studies identify that community participation has an impact in empowering the community (Ahluwalia et al. 2003; Teela et al. 2009; Mushi et al. 2010; Prata et al. 2012), and the other two examine how community participation can reduce inequalities in healthcare (Emond et al. 2002; Rath et al. 2010).

2.7.4.1 Empowering the Community
In order to conduct maternal health programmes for safer motherhood, it is necessary for these programmes to meet the needs of the community. Therefore, the involvement of the community in the programme is very important. Moreover, some of the maternal health activities that are conducted after the discussion with the community, are also essential in order to meet their needs (Ahluwalia et al. 2003). Some maternal health programmes are also involved with and recruit voluntary health workers in order to reach out to the community and enhance the sense of ownership for the programmes (Teela et al. 2009). Active participation of the community, especially in maternal health, has the potential to improve its power and independence in providing maternal healthcare. This happens because the community has responsibility for planning, managing, implementing, monitoring and evaluating the programme (Mushi et al. 2010; Prata et al. 2012). These responsibilities come as a result of making decisions about health programmes that are based on their needs.

A community based intervention study conducted by Mushi et al. (2010) into the effectiveness of community-based safe motherhood programmes in improving the utilisation of obstetric care in Tanzania; indicates that empowerment of the community could improve maternal health. Mushi et al. (2010) evaluated the safer motherhood programme in four rural districts of Tanzania and demonstrated that active participation of each community in rural areas improved their maternal health. The project task is focused on promoting early and complete antenatal care and having safe birth with skilled health professionals. This task was implemented by trained community health workers from each village. The safer motherhood programme successfully empowered the community in maternal health as it was implemented based on the community context (Mushi et al. 2010). Mushi et al. (2010) provide a strong comparative study in each rural district, with the evaluation process that was conducted in each village explained in detail. Although there is little discussion on the methodology, the data collection process is presented clearly in the study. NMS20712 1046

