NMS208_3R_Ex05
So, for this thesis, once the search strategy had been put together and undertaken each found text was appraised, first by the completion of a synopsis recorded using the suggested format. Once complete and a decision made about relevance, a further critical analysis of the relevant texts was then undertaken. This analysis followed the suggested template. Examples of each of the initial synopsis and the critical review are provided in Appendix Two. Themes that emerged from this process were created and added to as the research process developed and as new primary studies came to light following later searches. This chapter follows this thematic structure echoing to some extent the two elements of approved mental health practice discussed earlier in Chapter One; the instrumental aspects of approved mental health practice and the moral framework. A last theme, the experience of approved mental health practice was also created. The relevant aspect of each piece of evidence is discussed within the theme to which it relates.

But first, the two studies not undertaken by the author and introduced in Chapter One as fundamental to this thesis, are explained in detail.
Research studies upon which this thesis builds
As introduced in Chapter One, this thesis has its origins in two studies not undertaken by the author. Both studies aimed to review the provision and organisation of approved mental health services and to explore the contribution made by Approved Social Workers to the establishment and maintenance of a comprehensive mental health service. To recap, in the first of these studies it was suggested that approved mental health practice might be opened-up to other non-medical professionals (Huxley and Kerfoot 1994) whilst in the second it was argued that the Approved Social Worker workforce in England and Wales was declining at the same time as the workload was increasing (Huxley et al., 2005).

In more detail, the first study, a postal survey, received a high response rate (82 out of a possible 117 local authorities). The survey contained questions to elicit the characteristics of Approved Social Workers: numbers; rates per head of population; location and workload. Of most relevance to this review is the question asking respondents to try and predict the effect on deployment of approved mental health practitioners that might arise from possible reforms in services anticipated at that time. The authors claim, with high certainty from the evidence they provide, a number of outcomes. First, that the formula for calculating the number of approved mental health practitioners required, or the best distribution of them, is rarely documented and a complicated issue to explore and explain. Second, that decisions upon which the calculation of need was based also varied, with some local authorities approving all eligible workers and others nominating just some. Moreover, of those nominated, it was found that some practitioners whilst approved were not active. The authors are unable to ascertain the reason for this dormancy and surmise that it might have been a consequence of initially allowing all previous workers to act as Approved Social Workers without the need to undergo additional approval.

Overall, the study concludes that Approved Social Work stood out as one of the few stable features in mental health services. However, despite this apparent stability the authors nonetheless proposed that other professions, such as community psychiatric nurses and probation officers could, with training, become specialist mental health workers including Approved Social Workers. It was feared at the time of the survey that local authorities' commitment to the deployment of such specialist workers might diminish and the authors appear to have considered the suggestion of opening up the role to other professionals as a possible solution (Huxley and Kerfoot 1994 pp. 320- 321). This is the first study to make this suggestion but, other than proposing that this would mean a need for training, provides no other comment as to whether professional background might be of relevance nor does it remark on any instrumental aspects or moral attributes that might be required.

Huxley and additional colleagues undertook a similar follow up postal survey ten years after the original (Huxley et al., 2005). This work took place during the protracted period of debate surrounding reform of mental health legislation in England and Wales and the growing trend to make appropriate use of relevant skills elsewhere in the mental health workforce, in line with the policy New Ways of Working as discussed in Chapter One. The significance of this particular study to the present thesis is the conclusion that numbers of Approved Social Workers were declining at the same time as workloads were increasing (Huxley et al., 2005 p. 504). However, this apparent decline is not surprising. As the authors themselves comment, in the earlier study against which this comparison is made, the number of inactive practitioners at the time of the first survey seemed unjustifiable (Huxley and Kerfoot 1994). Any decline has to be measured in the light of this. The authors provide other reasons, again based on conjecture. They suggest that the perceived downturn in supply is due to the lack of specialist mental health teaching on qualifying social work training courses as well as the increasing opportunity for qualified workers to seek employment in other sectors where pay and conditions were superior.

In addition to providing this, albeit contested numerical context, of most interest to this review is the second question which the authors of this second study posed: if Approved Social Work is opened-up to other professionals, what would be the nature, extent and relevance of required skills? Unfortunately, this question was deemed beyond scope of the study and remained unanswered. Further published papers were derived from this latter survey exploring the emotional aspects of Approved Social Work (Evans et al., 2005, Huxley et al., 2005, Evans et al., 2006) and will be discussed below. But first, this review turns to the instrumental and moral aspects which are the first of the overarching thematic themes found in the literature search and review. NMS20805 998

