NMS207_07ER_Ex14
Community-based approaches are adapted from the less active community level of participation. In this model, professionals or external agencies define the problem and develop strategies to remedy it (Labonte and Laverack 2001). The professionals or agencies may involve the community members in solving the problem and implementing the programmes. However, the decision-making power lies primarily with the professionals and the external agencies. A community-based approach is important in addressing the needs of the community. However, Labonte (1994) argues that it is not community development that attempts to support community groups in resolving concerns as group members define them. Moreover, the sustainability of a community- based programme might be less effective compared with community development models that respond to building community resources and capacities, and self-sustaining programmes (Laverack 2001).

Some studies found the effectiveness of specific community interventions at the level of passive recipient (Emond et al. 2002; Perreira 2002; Shefner-Rogers and Sood 2004). At this level, the community generally received the intervention and were involved by being participants in the programme (Rosato et al. 2008). The activities included maternal health service promotion and intervention (Emond et al. 2002) and community education and promotion of maternal health (Perreira 2002; Shefner-Rogers and Sood 2004). Other studies have investigated the effectiveness of community participation either on their own or at combined levels, where the community provides the resources and is the active agent (Rosato et al. 2008). In north-western Nigeria, the 'Prevention Maternal Mortality' project conducted by Shehu (1999) showed that involving the community in recognising problems, making action plans and engaging the community in the implementation of reducing maternal death factors, led to a reduction in maternal mortality in the project's area (Shehu 1999). The Community-Based Reproductive Health Project (CBRHP) evaluated by Ahluwalia et al. (2003) in Tanzania, showed the value of upgrading a health centre to a basic hospital complete with emergency obstetric care (EMOC), with an emphasis on community participation. This intervention also included training of healthcare staff and strong links to community health workers (CHWs) and trained the TBAs (Ahluwalia et al. 2003). The effectiveness of involving the community through the provision of trained CHWs and TBAs is also reported in a pilot randomised controlled trials (RCT) in Pakistan (Bhutta 2008) and in northern Nigeria (Prata et al. 2012). Furthermore, studies of Mobile Obstetric Maternal Health Workers (MOMs) in Eastern Burma conducted by Teela et al. (2009) and maternal health education in Uganda conducted by Ogwang et al. (2012) also show the effectiveness of community involvement in maternal healthcare, both at passive and active levels of participation.

Although evidence increasingly favours the effectiveness of community participation interventions, the comparison of the studies by Ahluwalia et al. (2003) in Tanzania and Teela et al. (2009) in eastern Burma has become a consideration in implementing the policy. The CBRHP in Tanzania suggests that community participation through delivering health services, with the establishment of EMOC in the villages, is an essential approach in reducing maternal mortality rate. On the other hand, the MOM project of Eastern Burma suggests that some EMOC services that are usually delivered only in healthcare settings might only be feasible in the community when alternatives are not available. Several other projects and studies test different combinations of interventions, also the interpretation and implementation of the findings should be considered carefully by policy makers. The important questions about the most effective models of community participation in maternal health should be based on the situations and barriers that are found in the community (Rosato et al. 2008).

2.7 The Gaps in the Literature Review
Based on the literature in this review, four themes were identified as the key messages in involving the community in maternal health programmes. The four themes, which are related to one another, are: increasing the knowledge and awareness of maternal health; social support; adequate health services; and ownership. For example, it can be argued that an increase in knowledge and awareness of maternal health could be achieved through social support during pregnancy and childbirth. This social support could also help women to access adequate health services and maintain community ownership of maternal health activities. Whilst this relationship to some extent could be seen in the literature, the exact interpretations that they provided are not yet understood. This could suggest that the involvement of the community in maternal health would lead to safer pregnancy and childbirth

The findings also highlighted some studies that adapt community participation models in addressing maternal health problems. However, none of the studies explicitly mentioned the role of the community in maternal healthcare during pregnancy and childbirth. Moreover, the reviewed studies also provide different perspectives and interventions from the community in providing maternal health services in different places. Therefore, the understanding of maternity experiences from the perspectives of service users (pregnant women and the community) and service providers (health professionals) should be gained in order to improve maternal health with the appropriate community setting approach. Therefore, this research intends to explore the experiences of pregnant women in relation to the involvement of the community, family members and health professionals during pregnancy and childbirth in Aceh, Indonesia. Moreover, this research explores not only the views of the women but also those of the relevant community members and health professionals on their involvement during pregnancy and childbirth, which could contribute to the engagement of a maternal health programme and reduce the incidence of maternal death in Aceh.

2.8 Summary
In this chapter, relevant papers related to maternal health and community participation, including the involvement of family members in safer motherhood programmes, have been reviewed. The research literature on community participation in maternal health in order to reduce maternal mortality, both in Indonesia and worldwide, has been presented.

The review of the literature gives some valuable insights into the importance of involving the community in maternal health programmes, in order to reduce maternal mortality. Many of the studies of maternal health programmes that have been discussed, report only one dimension - from either the woman's partner's or the community's viewpoint - about the effectiveness of community participation in maternal health. Alternatively, the perceptions of health professionals (midwives) of the community's role in maternal health practices are also important. However, none of these studies explore women's, midwives' and community's perceptions of pregnancy and childbirth experiences simultaneously.
All of the studies in this literature review are focused on a different aspect, but some of the findings related to the views on the role of the community, as well as their experiences in maternal health. A study based on the perceptions and experiences during pregnancy and childbirth in the community, would add stronger evidence to the knowledge base on maternal health. The next chapter, the methodology and research design in this study will be provided. NMS20714 1115e

