NMS208_3R_Ex08

The value of training is reported as absent or poorly rated by nearly all respondents in a further study although this, whilst published in 2003, does not give an indication of when the actual research was carried out (Bowers et al., 2003). It is therefore not possible to orientate this reported finding with developments in formal training which may, or may not, have occurred nor, as was discussed earlier is it clear to which professional background such remarks are attributed. Indeed, this perception contrasts with the views of participants elsewhere who reported that mandatory training then offered to professionals wishing to become Approved Social Workers had far reaching benefits. In addition, it was reported that participants would like to see the training extended to other professional groups with similar statutory responsibilities (Walton, 2000 p. 411).

So far, the evidence of the impact of training is mixed. Almost a decade later, Parker (2010) analysed data from the first year of Approved Mental Health Professional training incorporated for the first time into a higher specialist award set at Master's Degree level and linked to the post-qualifying social work framework which was at that time regulated by the General Social Care Council. Data collected from one, first, year of the specialist training programme is examined to determine any impact of this higher education level upon enrolment, retention and completion. Five Approved Mental Health Professional students from non-social work backgrounds were included in the cohort but, unfortunately for this review, no discussion was had about their different training needs or knowledge, if any. Instead, the study's author expressed some surprise at the relatively low take up by other professions of what was the then newly reconfigured Approved Mental Health Professional role.

Meanwhile, a different study concluded that training did make a positive impact on knowledge gained. In an analysis of concept maps drawn by participants before, during and after training as Approved Mental Health Professionals it was found that whilst one profession, social work, when embarking on training had a greater understanding of the role in comparison to mental health nurses, on completion, both demonstrated similar levels of learning (Bressington et al., 2011 p.564). This was a small scale exploratory study where the main focus is on the use of the method of concept mapping to illustrate how new knowledge is assimilated with existing understanding. Nonetheless, it might suggest that approved mental health practice knowledge can be taught irrespective of professional background. Almost as an aside, the potential for discrimination towards nurses whilst training as Approved Mental Health Professionals was noted and evidenced in direct quotes, a finding which is of interest in relation to process and impact.

The evidence presented in this section of the chapter suggests that approved mental health practice has a knowledge base which can be learned. To begin Approved Social Work is viewed as an especially problematic activity and there is agreement because of this that special knowledge and training is required (Fisher et al., 1984) so that the Approved Social Worker can approach an assessment in a less narrow and legalistic way (Haynes, 1990). According to several studies the training that has been undertaken has had varying impact with some viewing it as lacking (Bowers et al., 2003, Christian, 1995, Haynes, 1990) and others regarding it as good (Campbell et al., 2001), even recommending it to other professional involved in assessments who were not Approved Social Workers (Walton, 2000). What is clear from the chronology of these studies is that the impact of the training has had an increasing impact over time. In direct relation to this thesis, the review indicates that the knowledge basis can be learned irrespective of professional background (Bressington et al., 2011).

So far, the review of the research evidence provides aspects of approved mental health practice to enable the smooth running of assessments and which have been summarised here as instrumental. However, one, seemingly mundane, attribute is also discussed and concerns the treating of those being assessed with dignity and respect illustrated by the example given of a worker saying he would do basic things like not sitting down without asking (Quirk et al., 2000 p. 27). This is a moral approach to approved mental health practice. Other studies in this review go on to provide a framework of the same which is the second overarching theme of this literature review to which this chapter now turns.
The moral framework

The moral framework for approved mental health practice attracts much attention in the research literature but, on closer inspection, the views that are based on empirical evidence are arguably flawed and the remainder are viewpoints only. This section of the literature review will first explore the principle of independence. When combined with the instrumental aspects already discussed, these are referred to as the social perspective, a fundamental aspect of approved mental health practice. NMS208 810 

