NMS207_04R_Ex11
The involvement of husbands during pregnancy and childbirth is an important factor in safer motherhood programmes. Most women consider their husbands as the main person they would like to be involved during their pregnancy and childbirth (Ny et al. 2007; Steen et al. 2012). Male involvement is also related to the phenomenon of the patriarchal system in the developing world, mostly in rural areas, where the decisions about a woman's needs and activities, including maternal health, are taken by the man (Kyasiimire 2003). The involvement of the husband during pregnancy and childbirth may increase the motivation of a woman, in order to attend the antenatal and postnatal care (Mullany et al. 2006; Steen et al. 2012). A review study conducted by Steen et al. (2012) on fathers' encounters with pregnancy and childbirth, suggested that husbands should provide advice and care during pregnancy. Moreover, fathers should have the option of being involved in attending the birth in accordance with women's wishes. However, most husbands see themselves as passive supporters, since pregnancy and childbirth are identified as a motherhood journey (Finnbogad—ttir et. al. 2003; Hsieh et al. 2006). Furthermore, some husbands who involved in pregnancy and childbirth described themselves as going through an uncertain journey to fatherhood (FŠgerskišld 2008); and usually experienced exclusion from the health staff, with the main focus towards their labouring partner (White 2007). The review study by Steen et al. (2012) also identified that a father cannot support his partner effectively during pregnancy and childbirth, unless he himself is also supported, included and prepared for the pregnancy, labour and parenthood, as well as aware of his role in this context. This review study is provides the inclusion and exclusion criteria of the reviewed studies. According to the findings of this research study, involving men in pregnancy, childbirth and maternity care is likely to provide effective support and positive maternal healthcare outcomes during pregnancy and childbirth.

Pregnancy and childbirth are very important experiences in women's lives (Kyasiimire 2003). There are many social aspects - such as the social environment, social conditions (household situation, chronic illness, depression) and social relationships - that have an effect on women during pregnancy and childbirth (Kazi et al. 2006). Maintaining effective social support would not only contribute to women being more likely to seek maternity care, but also minimise their psychosocial problems, which could lead to later maternal health problems (Kazi et al. 2006; Ny et al. 2007). All of the studies described above also identified that the involvement of family members, especially husbands during pregnancy and childbirth may influence the woman in terms of maintaining or adopting healthy pregnancy behaviours (Teitler 2001; Steen et al. 2012). Another study, conducted by Maimbolwa et al. (2001) on involving social support during labour in Zambian maternities, emphasised the involvement of female relatives. The study suggested that the involvement of female family members (mothers, mothers-in-law, sisters, etc.) especially in developing countries, would increase women's confidence and provide comfort for them during childbirth (Maimbolwa et al. 2001).

The involvement of the male partner was evident during pregnancy and childbirth, most women in rural areas especially in the developing countries still wanted their female relatives' presence during their labour. The involvement of female relatives was also important for their experiences in maternity care. Most review papers in this study emphasised both male and female relatives as women's social support during pregnancy and childbirth. It is important to address the involvement of social support for women during pregnancy and childbirth in order to provide positive maternal health outcomes and better maternity services in the future. Although most studies focused on the role of husbands as family support, more research is needed in order to study the involvement of female family members as social support during pregnancy and childbirth. Understanding the role of the community and family members during pregnancy and childbirth, would help the community to improve the quality and increase the support of maternity care.

2.7.3 Adequate Health Services
Nine studies indicated that the involvement of the community in maternal healthcare resulted in the provision of adequate health services in the region. These studies can be categorised into two sub-themes based on access to the health services (Kidney et al. 2009; Lee et al. 2009; Azad et al. 2009; Titaley et al. 2010; Ogwang et al. 2012) and access based on professional assistance (Makowiecka et al. 2008; Ronsmans et al. 2009; Lassi et al. 2010; Prata et al. 2012).

2.7.3.1  Access to the Health Services
It is clear that if women are to receive high quality maternity care, first they need to be able to access the services. In most developing countries, the availability of health services is limited, especially in remote areas and remains a problem (Titaley et al. 2010). In places where maternal health services are very limited, the community has a significant role in assisting and facilitating health services for the people (Rifkin 1990). A review study conducted by Lee et al. (2009) into linking families and facilities for care at birth provided evidence on community mobilisation with high levels of community engagement. Linking the families as well as the community to health facilities could also significantly reduce maternal and early neonatal death (Lee et al. 2009). The community plays a significant role in linking the women to the health facilities, especially when an emergency occurs during pregnancy and childbirth (Lee et al. 2009; Ogwang et al. 2012). NMS20711 900

